{"conditions":[{"name":"Pacemaker implantation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/PacemakerImplantation","content":"Pacemaker implantation - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pacemaker implantation  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview PacemakerImplantation Clinical trials Pacemaker implantation PacemakerImplantation Why it's performed PacemakerImplantation How it's performed PacemakerImplantation FAQs PacemakerImplantation Risks Introduction  If you need to have a pacemaker fitted, a small electrical device called a pacemaker will be surgically implanted in your chest. The pacemaker sends electrical pulses to your heart to keep it beating regularly and not too slowly. Having a pacemaker can significantly improve your quality of life if you have problems with a slow heart rate. The device can be lifesaving for some people. In the UK, pacemaker implantation is one of the most common types of heart surgery carried out, with many thousands of pacemakers fitted each year. How a pacemaker works A pacemaker is a small device about the size of a matchbox that weighs 20-50g. It consists of a pulse generator \u2013 which has a battery and a tiny computer circuit \u2013 and one or more wires, known as pacing leads, which attach to your heart. The pulse generator emits electrical impulses through the wires to your heart. The rate at which the electrical impulses are sent out is called the pacing rate. Almost all modern pacemakers work on demand. This means they can be programmed to adjust the discharge rate in response to your body's needs. If the pacemaker senses that your heart has missed a beat or is beating too slowly, it sends signals at a steady rate. If it senses that your heart is beating normally by itself, it doesn't send out any signals. Most pacemakers have a special sensor that recognises body movement or your breathing rate. This allows them to speed up the discharge rate when you're active. Doctors describe this as rate responsive. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device similar to a pacemaker. It sends a larger electrical shock to the heart that essentially \"reboots\" it to get it pumping again. Some devices contain both a pacemaker and an ICD. ICDs are often used as a preventative treatment for people thought to be at risk of cardiac arrest at some point in the future. If the ICD senses the heart is beating at a potentially dangerous abnormal rate, it will deliver an electrical shock to the heart. This often helps return the heart to a normal rhythm. A conventional ICD has a pacing lead that's implanted along a vein (transvenously). There's also a newer type of ICD where the pacing lead is implanted under the skin (subcutaneously). Why do I need a pacemaker? The heart is essentially a pump made of muscle, which is controlled by electrical signals. These signals can become disrupted for several reasons, which can lead to a number of potentially dangerous heart conditions, such as: an abnormally slow heartbeat (bradycardia) or an abnormally fast heartbeat (tachycardia) heart block \u2013 where your heart beats irregularly because the electrical signals that control your heartbeat aren't transmitted properly  cardiac arrest \u2013 when a problem with the heart's electrical signals cause the heart to stop beating altogether Read more about why you might need a pacemaker. How is a pacemaker fitted? Having a pacemaker implanted is a relatively straightforward process. It's usually carried out under local anaesthetic, which means you'll be awake during the procedure. The generator is usually placed under the skin near the collarbone on the left side of the chest. The generator is attached to a wire that's guided through a blood vessel to the heart. The procedure usually takes about an hour, and most people are well enough to leave hospital the day after surgery. Read more about how a pacemaker is fitted. After pacemaker surgery You should be able to return to normal physical activities soon after surgery. As a precaution, it's usually recommended that strenuous activities are avoided for around four to six weeks after having a pacemaker fitted. After this, you should be able to do most activities and sports. You'll be able to feel the pacemaker, but you'll soon get used to it. It may seem a bit heavy at first, and may feel uncomfortable when you lie in certain positions. You'll need to attend regular check-ups to make sure your pacemaker is working properly. Most pacemakers store information about your natural heart rhythms. When you have follow-up appointments, your doctor can retrieve this information and use it to check how well your heart and the pacemaker are working. Most ordinary household electrical equipment is safe to use and won't interfere with your pacemaker. This includes microwaves, as long as they're in good working order. Read more about recovering from pacemaker surgery.  Safety Having a pacemaker implanted is usually a very safe procedure with a low risk of complications. The biggest concern is the pacemaker losing its ability to control the heartbeat, either because it malfunctions or the wire moves out of the correct position. It's sometimes possible to reprogramme the pacemaker to fix a malfunction using wireless signals. However, further surgery may be needed if the pacemaker moves out of position. Read more about the risks of having a pacemaker. Alternatives to a pacemaker In some cases, it may be possible to control an abnormal heartbeat (arrhythmia) without having a pacemaker fitted. For example, atrial fibrillation can sometimes be treated with medication or a non-surgical procedure called catheter ablation. However, not all people with an arrhythmia can be treated in this way, and in many cases a pacemaker is considered to be the most effective option. If your cardiologist recommends having a pacemaker fitted, ask them why they think it's the best option and discuss any possible alternative treatments you could have. New technology A new, smaller pacemaker about the size of a pill has been developed and is currently being tested in a global clinical trial. The new device uses wireless technology and can be implanted directly into the heart, where it delivers electrical impulses from an electrode. This means a lead isn't required, which has the benefits of lowering the risk of infection and shortening the recovery time associated with implanting traditional pacemakers. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 07\/12\/2015 Next review due: 07\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 933 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 556  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 198  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arrhythmia Atrial fibrillation Having an operation Healthy hearts Heart block External links Arrhythmia Alliance British Heart Foundation: pacemakers Pacemaker Plus Atrial fibrillation Atrial fibrillation is a heart condition that causes an irregular and often abnormally fast heart rate Find and choose services for Pacemaker implantation Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pagets-disease-of-the-nipple","content":"Paget's disease of the nipple - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Paget's disease of the nipple  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pagets-disease-of-the-nipple Clinical trials Paget's disease of the nipple pagets-disease-of-the-nipple Diagnosis pagets-disease-of-the-nipple Treatment pagets-disease-of-the-nipple Prevention Introduction  Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple, also known as Paget\u2019s disease of the breast, is a rare type of breast cancer. The term Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple is used to distinguish the condition from Paget\u2019s disease of the bone, which occurs when the normal cycle of bone growth is disrupted, leading to the bones becoming weak and deformed. A similar type of skin cancer can also occur in other parts of the body. The rest of this section will use the term Paget\u2019s disease to refer to Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple or breast. Symptoms of Paget's disease Paget's disease usually affects the skin of one nipple and produces eczema-like symptoms, appearing as an itchy, red rash on the nipple that can extend to the darker area of surrounding skin (the areola). It can also appear as a small ulcer or dry, red, flaky patches of skin similar to psoriasis. Other possible symptoms include: itchiness or a burning sensation \u2013 alongside visible changes to the nipple (see above) bleeding from the skin of the nipple If you're experiencing itchiness, burning or bleeding but the nipple looks normal and isn't red, dry or scaly \u2013 this is extremely unlikely to be Paget's disease but should still be checked by a doctor. Causes of Paget's disease Paget\u2019s disease is usually a sign of breast cancer in tissue behind the nipple, or breast tissue away from the nipple. The breast cancer can either be: invasive \u2013 where cancerous cells invade the surrounding breast tissue non-invasive \u2013 where the cancerous cells are contained in one or more areas of the breast and are unable to spread In a small amount of cases, the only evidence of Paget's disease is the nipple changes. In about half of all cases of Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple, a lump is found in the breast. The majority of people with a lump will have invasive breast cancer, although this does not necessarily mean it has spread. Most people with Paget's disease of the nipple who don't have a lump will have non-invasive breast cancer. Diagnosing Paget's disease You should visit your GP if you notice any changes in the skin of your nipple or areola (the darker area of skin around the nipple). As Paget\u2019s disease is a form of breast cancer, the sooner it's diagnosed, the better the outcome is likely to be. See your GP if you develop a lump in your breast. While most breast lumps are not cancerous, it's important you have it checked out. Read more about: the symptoms of breast cancer how Paget's disease is diagnosed Treating Paget's disease Paget\u2019s disease is treated in the same way as breast cancer.  Surgery is usually the first line of treatment but unlike other forms of breast cancer, it involves removing breast tissue that includes the nipple and areola. This may be followed by a combination of: chemotherapy \u2013 where powerful medication is used to destroy cancerous cells radiotherapy \u2013 where controlled doses of high-energy radiation are used to destroy cancerous cells biological or hormone therapy \u2013 which can be used to treat certain types of cancer  If Paget's disease is detected and treated in its early stages, there's a good chance of recovery. Read more about how Paget's disease is treated. Preventing Paget's disease Modifying certain lifestyle factors, such as reducing alcohol intake and regular exercise, may reduce your risk of developing certain types of cancer, including breast cancer. However, these factors remain controversial. Screening is also used to help detect breast cancer early. The NHS Breast Screening Programme provides free breast screening every three years for all women in the UK who are 47 years of age or over. Read more about preventing breast cancer. Risk factors for breast cancer There are a number of factors that can increase your risk of developing breast cancer. These include: age \u2013 your risk of developing breast cancer increases as you get older family history \u2013 if you have a number of close relatives with breast cancer, your chances of also developing the condition are increased previously being diagnosed with breast cancer previously having a benign breast lump \u2013 certain types of benign lump may slightly increase your risk but this is only seen in a small number of women being overweight \u2013 which is especially significant in post-menopausal women (use the BMI healthy weight calculator to find out whether you are overweight or obese) alcohol \u2013 your risk of developing breast cancer can increase with the amount of alcohol you drink Read more about the risk factors for breast cancer. Information about you If you have Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Breast cancer: Emma's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Emma Duncan, 33, talks about her experience of having breast cancer. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 How common is Paget\u2019s disease? Paget\u2019s disease of the nipple affects one to two out of every 100 women with breast cancer. Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer that affects women in the UK. About 48,000 women get breast cancer in Britain each year. Most (eight out of 10) are aged over 50, but younger women, and in rare cases, men, can also get breast cancer. Breast cancer symptoms Not all breast changes mean breast cancer, but some do. Know what to look out for, such as changes in shape Page last reviewed: 01\/08\/2014 Next review due: 01\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 100 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast cancer Breast reconstruction Chemotherapy Mastectomy Radiotherapy External links Against Breast Cancer Breakthrough Breast Cancer Breast Cancer Care: breast awareness Cancer Research UK: Paget\u2019s disease healthtalk.org: breast cancer in women Macmillan: OPERA NHS Breast Screening Programme Breast cancer Information on breast changes to watch out for, plus breast cancer genes, breast reconstruction and mastectomy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paget's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pagets-disease","content":"Paget's disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Paget's disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pagets-disease Clinical trials Pagets-disease Community Paget's disease Pagets-disease Symptoms Pagets-disease Causes Pagets-disease Diagnosis Pagets-disease Treatment Pagets-disease Complications Introduction  Paget's disease disrupts the normal cycle of bone renewal and repair, causing bones to become weakened and deformed. Bone pain is the most common symptom of Paget's disease, often affecting the pelvis or spine. The pain is usually worse when lying down. You should visit your GP if you experience bone pain or notice any bone deformities. However, in many cases of Paget's disease, there are no noticeable symptoms and it's only diagnosed during tests for an unrelated medical condition, or when a bone is fractured. Read more about the symptoms of Paget's disease and diagnosing Paget's disease. Why does Paget's disease happen? Paget's disease is caused by a problem with the process of bone regeneration, which results in bone being replaced at a faster rate than usual. This leads to enlarged bones that are weak and brittle. It's not clear why this happens, but both genetic and environmental factors are believed to be important. There is a family history of the condition in around 10-15% of cases. Read more about the causes of Paget's disease. Treating Paget's disease The condition is not usually treated immediately if you're not experiencing symptoms, although your health will be regularly monitored. Treatment can help relieve symptoms and prevent the condition getting worse, but there's no cure for Paget's disease. Medication can help control bone regeneration, with a type of medicine called bisphosphonates being the first choice. These are taken as a tablet or given as an injection. Over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen can help relieve bone pain. Surgery is only used if Paget's disease causes further problems, such as osteoarthritis or a bone fracture. Read more about treating Paget's disease. Complications Complications of Paget's disease are uncommon, but can be serious. They include bone deformities, hearing loss and osteoarthritis. In very rare cases, Paget's disease can cause heart failure or bone cancer. Read more about complications of Paget's disease. Who is affected? After osteoporosis, Paget's disease is the second most common type of bone disease in the UK, although the number of cases is declining. It most often occurs in people of white British descent and is very rare among other ethnic groups. The UK has the highest rates of Paget's disease in the world. It's also relatively common in countries with high levels of migration from Britain, such as Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. Paget's disease is an age-related condition and rarely affects young people. It's estimated about 2-3% of white adults aged over 50 have the condition in the UK. Other types of Paget's disease Paget's disease is named after James Paget, an English surgeon, who first described the condition's symptoms in 1877. A number of other conditions were also named after James Paget, including: Paget's disease of the nipple \u2013 a rare type of breast cancer Paget's disease of the penis \u2013 another rare type of cancer To avoid confusion, healthcare professionals often use the term \"Paget's disease of the bone\" to distinguish this condition from the ones above. However, for ease of reading, this topic uses the term \"Paget's disease\" to refer to \"Paget's disease of the bone\". Information about you If you have Paget's disease, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Paget's disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An expert describes the various areas of the body that can be affected by Paget's disease, a condition where the normal cycle of bone growth is disrupted. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 05\/12\/2014 Next review due: 05\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 193 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bone cancer Healthy bones Living with pain Osteoarthritis Osteoporosis External links Arthritis Research UK Paget's Association Find and choose services for Paget's disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Pain\/Pages\/Painhome.aspx","content":"Living with pain - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Living with pain Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Pain Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus 10 pain self-help tips Practical ways to beat pain, including relaxation tips, breathing exercises and courses for patients. Where's your pain? Find links to information on pain according to which part of your body is affected. 20 painful health conditions 20 health conditions that cause notoriously severe pain, including shingles, frozen shoulder, cluster headache, endometriosis and arthritis. How to get NHS help for your pain Find out what NHS help for pain is available from your GP and hospital pain clinics. Sex advice for people with chronic pain Chronic pain sufferers can see their sex life fizzle out. Read advice on how to revive sex with your partner. Which painkiller? The benefits and side effects of painkillers, and how to choose the best painkiller to fight your type of pain Back pain at work Avoid back pain at work, with tips on desk organisation, adjusting your chair and lifting safely. Ways to manage chronic pain It's important to keep active if you have a long-term painful condition. Painkillers and physical therapy also help. Painkiller headaches Taking too many painkillers can make your headaches worse. How to avoid and treat painkiller headaches. 10 headache triggers Diet, anger and posture can all cause headaches. Practical advice on avoiding 10 little-known headache triggers. Getting started Get a free leaflet on self-help for pain (PDF, 4.5Mb) Enrol on a free course to manage long-term pain Share other people's real-life stories of pain Learn more about NHS pain management programmes (PDF, 130kb) Where's your pain? Back pain guide Learn about types of back pain, get advice on treatment and learn ways of preventing back pain in the future. Community content from HealthUnlocked End of life symptom control Find out about managing pain and other symptoms, such as constipation and nausea, at the end of life NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pain, shoulder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/shoulderpain","content":"Shoulder pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Shoulder pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview shoulderpain Clinical trials Shoulder pain shoulderpain Causes shoulderpain Diagnosis shoulderpain Treatment Introduction  Shoulder pain is a common problem with a number of different causes. It's often a symptom of another problem. There are a number of reasons why you might be experiencing shoulder pain, which include: poor posture frozen shoulder \u2013 a painful condition that reduces normal movement in the joint and can sometimes prevent movement in the shoulder altogether rotator cuff disorders \u2013 the rotator cuff is a group of muscles and tendons that surround the shoulder joint and help to keep it stable shoulder instability \u2013 where the shoulder is unstable and may have an unusually large range of movement (hypermobility)  acromioclavicular joint disorders \u2013 conditions, including osteoarthritis that affect the acromioclavicular joint, which is the joint at the top of the shoulder osteoarthritis in the shoulder joints a broken (fractured) bone, such as a fracture of the humerus (upper arm bone) or broken collarbone In some cases, pain in the shoulder isn't caused by a problem in the shoulder joint, but by a problem in another area, such as the neck, that is felt in the shoulder and upper back. Read more about the causes of shoulder pain. Treating shoulder pain There are things you can do yourself to treat shoulder pain, including using painkillers such as ibuprofen, or ice packs to reduce inflammation and relieve pain. Avoiding activities that may aggravate your symptoms will also help. Depending on the cause of your shoulder pain, you may need further treatment, such as: physiotherapy injections of corticosteroids \u2013 a type of medication that contains hormones  surgery (in some cases) In most cases, shoulder disorders improve over time if treatment advice is followed. Read about how shoulder pain is treated. When to see your GP You should see your GP if your pain is the result of an injury, is particularly bad, or there is no sign of improvement after a couple of weeks. Shoulder pain can be a long-term problem: up to half of people still have symptoms after 18 months. A correct diagnosis will ensure you receive the right treatment. Read more about diagnosing shoulder pain. Shoulder pain Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A physiotherapist explains what you can do to prevent and ease shoulder pain, and when to get help from an expert. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Who is affected? Shoulder disorders are fairly common: about three in 10 adults are affected by them at any one time. Frozen shoulder and rotator cuff disorders are most common in middle-aged and older people. Shoulder instability and acromioclavicular joint disorders tend to affect younger people, particularly men who play: sports that involve repetitive shoulder movements, such as overarm bowling or throwing contact sports, such as rugby, where you may injure or fall on your shoulder Page last reviewed: 26\/10\/2014 Next review due: 26\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 765 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 197  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 188  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 169  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Dislocated shoulder Dupuytren's contracture Find services: injury support Frozen shoulder Impingement syndrome (trapped shoulder tendon) Living with pain Osteoarthritis Sports injuries External links Arthritis Research UK: shoulder pain Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: physiotherapy Pain Concern The Pain Toolkit Sports Injury Clinic: shoulder injuries National Joint Registry: public and patient guide on shoulder replacement Neck pain or a stiff neck Neck pain or a stiff neck is a common problem and generally nothing to worry about. Find out about the main causes and how to relieve it Impingement syndrome Impingement syndrome is pain and often weakness when you raise your arm, caused by a muscle tendon 'catching' in your shoulder NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Painful tongue","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/tongue-pain","content":"Sore or painful tongue - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore or painful tongue  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sore tongue Introduction  A sore or painful tongue is usually caused by something obvious and visible, although there are a few less obvious causes you should be aware of that may need treating. If the pain is persistent and you haven't accidentally bitten or burnt your tongue, see your GP or dentist. There may be an underlying problem that needs treating, and your GP or dentist may be able to advise you about pain relief while you wait for it to get better. This page outlines the most likely causes of tongue pain, but you shouldn't use it to diagnose yourself with a condition \u2013 always leave that to a healthcare professional. Common causes Common causes of tongue pain are outlined below. Geographic tongue Also known as benign migratory glossitis or oral erythema migrans, geographic tongue is a common condition that causes irregular red patches surrounded by white lines to develop on the tongue, giving it a map-like appearance. In some people, the red patches may feel sore or sensitive to certain foods and drinks. You may notice that after a few days, weeks or months the position of these lines and patches change. They may disappear and re-appear later on a different part of the tongue. Some people find the condition improves over time, while for others it may be persistent. See your GP or dentist if you have persistent discoloured or painful patches on your tongue. It\u2019s not clear exactly what causes geographic tongue and there is no specific treatment for it, but you may be able to manage the pain by taking over-the-counter painkillers (speak to your pharmacist for advice) and avoiding anything that makes it worse, such as acidic, spicy or hot foods. Oral thrush Oral thrush is an infection in the mouth caused by a fungus, which can cause a coated or white tongue and areas of soreness. You are more likely to develop oral thrush if you: have recently taken antibiotics have poor oral hygiene wear dentures (false teeth), particularly if they don't fit properly have a weakened immune system have diabetes You should see your GP if you think you have oral thrush. If it is left untreated, the symptoms will persist and your mouth will continue to be uncomfortable. Oral thrush is treated with antifungal medicines taken for around a week. These usually come in the form of gels or liquid that you apply directly inside your mouth, although tablets or capsules are sometimes used. Aphthous mouth ulcers Aphthous mouth ulcers are painful sores that can occur anywhere within the mouth and are common on the underside of the tongue. Many mouth ulcers are caused by damage to the mouth, such as from accidentally biting your tongue or eating something hard and sharp. Ulcers that keep recurring have been linked to things such as stress, anxiety, hormone changes, certain foods and stopping smoking. Read more about the causes of mouth ulcers. Most mouth ulcers heal within a week or two and you may be able to manage the pain in the meantime by taking over-the-counter painkillers and avoiding anything that worsens it, such as spicy foods. See your GP or dentist if you have an ulcer that doesn\u2019t improve within a few weeks or if you develop ulcers regularly. Less common causes Less commonly, tongue pain may be caused by: a viral infection \u2013 such as an infection by viruses that cause hand, foot and mouth disease or cold sores vitamin deficiencies and anaemia \u2013 a sore tongue can sometimes be a symptom of iron deficiency anaemia and vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia median rhomboid glossitis \u2013 where a smooth, red, inflamed patch develops on the middle or back of the tongue, thought to result from a fungal infection glossodynia or \"burning mouth syndrome\" \u2013 a burning pain on the tip of the tongue that is often seen in people with depression glossopharyngeal neuralgia \u2013 repeated episodes of severe tongue pain believed to be caused by nerve irritation lichen planus \u2013 a long-term skin condition that causes an itchy rash and can also affect the mouth, causing a white lacy pattern and painful patches on the tongue Behçet's disease \u2013 a rare condition that causes inflammation of the blood vessels and can also lead to painful mouth ulcers  pemphigus vulgaris \u2013 a rare and serious condition that causes painful blisters to develop on the skin, as well as inside the mouth, nose, throat, anus and genitals medications \u2013 painful mouth ulcers can be a side effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and beta-blockers, and certain mouthwashes can cause tongue pain in some people Moeller's glossitis \u2013 a type of inflammation of the tongue cancer of the tongue \u2013 although this is rare Click on the above links for more information about these conditions and medications. Oral thrush can cause sore white plaques on the tongue  Page last reviewed: 13\/11\/2014 Next review due: 13\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 634 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 244  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Coated or white tongue Iron deficiency anaemia Mouth ulcers Oral thrush Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia External links Behçet's Syndrome Society DermNet NZ: geographic tongue Mouth ulcers Mouth ulcers are painful round or oval sores that form in the mouth, most often on the inside of the cheeks or lips Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Painkillers, ibuprofen","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Painkillers-ibuprofen","content":"Ibuprofen - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ibuprofen  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Painkillers-ibuprofen Clinical trials Ibuprofen   Ibuprofen is a painkiller available over the counter without a prescription. It's one of a group of painkillers called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and can be used to: ease mild to moderate pain \u2013 such as toothache, migraine and period pain control a fever (high temperature) \u2013 for example, when someone has the flu (influenza) ease pain and inflammation (redness and swelling) caused by conditions that affect the joints, bones and muscles \u2013 such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis ease pain and swelling caused by sprains and strains \u2013 such as sports injuries This topic covers: Types of ibuprofen Who can take ibuprofen How to take ibuprofen Interactions with medicines, food and alcohol Side effects of ibuprofen Overdoses of ibuprofen Types of ibuprofen You can buy most types of ibuprofen from supermarkets or pharmacies. Some types are only available on prescription. Ibuprofen is available in many forms, including: tablets capsules liquids gels or creams sprays In some products ibuprofen is combined with other ingredients. For example, it's sometimes combined with medicine for a blocked nose (a decongestant) and sold as a cold and flu remedy. Who can take ibuprofen Some people should avoid using ibuprofen and others should use it with caution. If you have any queries about using ibuprofen or any other medicines, speak to your GP or pharmacist, or call NHS 111. You shouldn't take ibuprofen if you: have a history of a strong, unpleasant reaction (hypersensitivity) to aspirin or other NSAIDs have a current or recent stomach ulcer, or you have had one in the past have severe heart failure have severe liver disease are taking low-dose aspirin for the prevention of cardiovascular disease You should use ibuprofen with caution if you're aged 65 or over, breastfeeding, or have: asthma kidney or liver problems lupus Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis previously had any bleeding in your stomach high blood pressure (hypertension) narrowing of the arteries (peripheral arterial disease) any problems with your heart, such as angina, heart attacks, or mild or moderate heart failure had a stroke Ibuprofen and pregnancy Ideally, pregnant women shouldn't take ibuprofen unless a doctor recommends it. But ibuprofen appears in breast milk in small amounts, so it's unlikely to cause any harm to your baby while you're breastfeeding. It's best to tell your GP, pharmacist or health visitor about any medicines you're taking. Paracetamol is recommended as an alternative to ease short-term pain or reduce a high temperature. Ibuprofen and children Ibuprofen may be given to children aged three months or over who weigh at least 5kg (11lbs) to relieve pain, inflammation or fever. Your GP or another healthcare professional may recommend ibuprofen for younger children in certain cases \u2013 for example, this may be to control a fever after a vaccination if paracetamol is unsuitable. If your baby or child has a high temperature that doesn't get better or they continue to experience pain, speak to your GP or call NHS 111. How to take ibuprofen Make sure you take ibuprofen as directed on the label or leaflet, or as instructed by a health professional. How much you can take depends on your age, the type of ibuprofen you're taking and how strong it is. For example: adults \u2013 can usually take one or two 200mg tablets every four to six hours, but shouldn't take more than 1,200mg (six 200mg) tablets in the space of 24 hours children under 16 \u2013 may need to take a lower dose, depending on their age; check the packet or leaflet, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice The painkilling effect of ibuprofen begins soon after a dose is taken, but the anti-inflammatory effect can sometimes take up to three weeks to get the best results. Ibuprofen shouldn't be used to treat conditions that are mainly related to inflammation. Don't take more than the recommended dose if it isn't relieving your symptoms. Adults can take paracetamol at the same time if necessary, but this isn't recommended for children. For more details, see Can I take paracetamol and ibuprofen together?. Contact your GP or call NHS 111 if your symptoms get worse or last more than three days despite taking ibuprofen. Interactions with medicines, food and alcohol Ibuprofen can react unpredictably with certain other medicines. This can affect how well either medicine works and increase the risk of side effects. Check the leaflet that comes with your medicine to see if it can be taken with ibuprofen. Ask your GP or local pharmacist if you're not sure.  As ibuprofen is a type of NSAID, you shouldn't take more than one of these at a time or you'll have an increased risk of side effects.  NSAIDs can also interact with many other medicines, including: some types of antidepressants \u2013 used to treat depression beta-blockers \u2013 used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) diuretics \u2013 which reduce the amount of fluid in your body Read more about medicines that interact with NSAIDs. Ibuprofen can also interact with ginkgo biloba, a controversial dietary supplement some people claim can treat memory problems and dementia. There are no known problems caused by taking ibuprofen with any specific foods or by drinking a moderate amount of alcohol. Side effects of ibuprofen Ibuprofen can cause a number of side effects. You should take the lowest possible dose for the shortest possible time needed to control your symptoms. See the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine for a full list of side effects. Common side effects of ibuprofen include: nausea or vomiting constipation or diarrhoea indigestion (dyspepsia) or abdominal pain Less common side effects include: headache or dizziness bloating (fluid retention) raised blood pressure inflammation of the stomach (gastritis) a stomach ulcer allergic reactions \u2013 such as a rash worsening of asthma symptoms by causing narrowing of the airways (bronchospasm) kidney failure black stools and blood in your vomit \u2013 this can indicate bleeding in your stomach If you feel unwell after taking ibuprofen or have concerns, speak to your GP or pharmacist, or call NHS 111. You can also report suspected side effects using the Yellow Card Scheme. High doses Taking high doses of ibuprofen over long periods of time can increase your risk of: stroke \u2013 when the blood supply to the brain is disturbed heart attacks \u2013 when the blood supply to the heart is blocked In women, long-term use of ibuprofen might be associated with reduced fertility. This is usually reversible when you stop taking ibuprofen. Overdoses of ibuprofen Taking too much ibuprofen, known as an overdose, can be very dangerous. If you've taken more than the recommended maximum dose, go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible. It can be helpful to take any remaining medicine and the box or leaflet with you to A&E if you can. Some people feel sick, vomit, have abdominal pain or ringing in their ears (tinnitus) after taking too much ibuprofen, but often there are no symptoms at first. Go to A&E even if you're feeling well. Page last reviewed: 17\/05\/2016 Next review due: 17\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 472 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 129  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Medicines info Migraine Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Pain Paracetamol Rheumatoid arthritis External links British Pain Society Yellow Card Scheme Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP Headaches Find out about the main types of headache, and when you should seek medical advice Your medicine cabinet A pharmacist explains the essential medicines no household should be without NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Children's medicines","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/childrens-medicines.aspx","content":"Medicines for babies and children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Medicines for babies and children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Should my doctor give my child antibiotics? (from 6 months) Media last reviewed: 01\/05\/2015 Next review due: 01\/05\/2017 Medicines aren't always needed for childhood illnesses. Most illnesses get better by themselves, and make your child stronger and able to resist similar illnesses in the future. Painkillers for children Paracetamol and ibuprofen are often used to relieve the discomfort caused by a high temperature. Some children, such as those with asthma, may not be able to take ibuprofen, so check with your pharmacist, GP or health visitor. Both paracetamol and ibuprofen are safe and effective. Always have one or both stored in a safe place at home. Don't give aspirin to children under 16 unless it's specifically prescribed by a doctor. It has been linked with a rare but dangerous illness called Reye's syndrome. If you're breastfeeding, ask your health visitor, midwife or GP for advice before taking aspirin. Paracetamol for children Paracetamol can be given to children over two months old for pain and fever. Make sure you've got the right strength for your child. Overdosing is dangerous. Check with your pharmacist when you buy it, and read the label carefully. Ibuprofen for children Ibuprofen can be given for pain and fever in children of three months and over who weigh more than 5kg (11lbs). Check the correct dose for your child's age. Avoid ibuprofen if your child has asthma, unless advised by your GP. Antibiotics for children Children don't often need antibiotics. Most childhood infections are caused by viruses, and antibiotics only treat illnesses caused by bacteria, not viruses. If you're offered a prescription, especially an antibiotic, talk to your GP about why it's needed, how it will help, and whether there are any alternatives. Ask about any possible side effects \u2013 for example, whether it will make your child sleepy or irritable. If your child is prescribed antibiotics, always finish the whole course to make sure all the bacteria are killed off. Your child may seem better after two or three days, but if the course is five days, they must carry on taking the medicine. The illness is more likely to return if you don't finish all the antibiotics. Child medicine dosages Make sure you know how much and how often to give a medicine. Writing it in your child's Personal Child Health Record (PCHR, or red book) may help you remember. See Your baby's health and development reviews for more information on the red book. If in doubt, check with your pharmacist or GP. Never give the medicine more frequently than recommended by your GP or pharmacist. With liquids, always measure out the right dose for your child's age. The instructions will be on the bottle. Sometimes liquid medicine may have to be given using a special spoon or liquid medicine measure. This allows you to give small doses of medicine more accurately. Never use a kitchen teaspoon, as they vary in size. Ask your pharmacist or health visitor to explain how a measure should be used. Always read the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the measure, and always give the exact dose stated on the medicine bottle. If in doubt, ask the pharmacist for help. If you buy medicines at the pharmacy: Always tell the pharmacist how old your child is. Some medicines are for adult use only. Always follow the instructions on the label or ask the pharmacist if you're unsure. Ask for sugar-free medicines if they're available. Look for the date stamp. Don't use out-of-date medicines. If you have any out-of-date medicines at home, take them back to the pharmacy for safe disposal. Only give your child medicine given to you by your GP, pharmacist or usual healthcare professional. Never use medicines prescribed for anyone else. Keep all medicines out of your child's reach and out of sight, if possible. The kitchen is a good place to keep medicines as it's easy for you to keep an eye on them there. Put them in a place where they won't get warm. Children and side effects from medicine If you think your child is reacting badly to a medicine \u2013 for example, with a rash or diarrhoea \u2013 stop giving it to them and speak to a health professional. If you're worried that a symptom may be a side effect of a medicine: read the patient information leaflet supplied with the medicine \u2013 this lists the known side effects and advises you what to do call NHS 111, or speak to a pharmacist or your GP or practice nurse report the side effect through the Yellow Card Scheme \u2013 the scheme is run by the UK medicines watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA); Yellow Card reports are used as an early warning system to collect information on side effects and take necessary action to protect the public if there is a problem Keep a note of the medicine's name in your child's red book for future reference. Can you get over-the-counter children's medicines for free? Some pharmacies run what's known as a minor ailment scheme for specific ailments, such as coughs and colds and diarrhoea and vomiting. When pharmacies provide medicines as part of a minor ailment scheme, you get the medicines on the NHS. You won't pay a prescription charge for children under 16. Not all pharmacies offer a minor ailment scheme and the ailments covered by the scheme vary from area to area. Read more about the minor ailments scheme. Page last reviewed: 01\/09\/2015 Next review due: 01\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles  Common childhood illnesses How do I report a side effect from a medicine? If your child has to go into hospital Pharmacy and medicines  When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Roseola Most children will have been infected with roseola by the time they enter nursery school. They'll usually fight off the virus and recover fully within a week Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Painkillers, paracetamol","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Painkillers-paracetamol","content":"Paracetamol - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Paracetamol  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Painkillers-paracetamol Clinical trials Paracetamol   Paracetamol is a commonly used medicine that can help treat pain and reduce a high temperature (fever). It's typically used to relieve mild or moderate pain, such as headaches, toothache or sprains, and reduce fevers caused by illnesses such as colds and flu. Paracetamol is often recommended as one of the first treatments for pain, as it's safe for most people to take and side effects are rare. This page covers: Types of paracetamol Who can take it How to take it Taking it with other medicines, food and alcohol Side effects Overdoses and extra doses Types of paracetamol You can buy most types of paracetamol from supermarkets or pharmacies. Some types are only available on prescription. Paracetamol is available as: tablets or caplets capsules liquid \u2013 usually for children soluble tablets (tablets that dissolve in water to make a drink) suppositories (capsules inserted into the back passage) an injection given into a vein \u2013 normally only used in hospital In some products, such as cold and flu remedies or certain combination painkillers, paracetamol is combined with other ingredients. It may be sold under the name paracetamol, or under various brand names (which may also contain other ingredients). Who can take paracetamol Most people can take paracetamol safely, including: pregnant women breastfeeding women children over two months of age \u2013 lower doses are recommended for young children (see How to take paracetamol below) If you're not sure whether you can take paracetamol, check the leaflet that comes with it or ask your pharmacist or doctor for advice. Always get advice before taking paracetamol if you: have liver or kidney problems have problems with alcohol, such as long-term alcohol misuse are very underweight are taking other medications (see Interactions with other medicines below) Don't take paracetamol if you've had an allergic reaction to it in the past. How to take paracetamol Make sure you take paracetamol as directed on the label or leaflet, or as instructed by a health professional. How much you can take depends on your age, your weight, the type of paracetamol you're taking and how strong it is. For example: Adults can usually take one or two 500mg tablets every 4-6 hours, but shouldn't take more than 4g (eight 500mg tablets) in the space of 24 hours. Children under 16 need to take a lower dose, depending on their age or weight \u2013 check the packet or leaflet, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice. For very young children, paracetamol liquid is given using a measuring spoon or an oral syringe. Paracetamol should start to work within an hour and the effect usually lasts several hours. Don't take more than the recommended dose if it isn't relieving your symptoms. Adults can take ibuprofen at the same time if necessary, but this isn't usually recommended for children. For more details, see Can I take paracetamol and ibuprofen together? Contact your GP or call NHS 111 if your symptoms get worse or last more than three days despite taking paracetamol. Be careful not to use other medications that contain paracetamol as an ingredient (such as some cold and flu remedies) while you're taking paracetamol. Taking paracetamol with other medicines, food and alcohol Paracetamol can react unpredictably with certain other medications. This can affect how well either medicine works and might increase the risk of side effects. It may not be safe to take paracetamol at the same time as: other products containing paracetamol \u2013 including combination products where paracetamol is one of the ingredients carbamazepine \u2013 used to treat epilepsy and some types of pain colestyramine \u2013 used to reduce itchiness caused by primary biliary cirrhosis (a type of liver disease) imatinib and busulfan \u2013 used to treat certain types of cancer ketoconazole \u2013 a type of antifungal medicine lixisenatide \u2013 used to treat type 2 diabetes metoclopramide \u2013 used to relieve nausea and vomiting phenobarbital, phenytoin and primidone \u2013 used to control seizures warfarin \u2013 used to prevent blood clots Check the leaflet that comes with your medicine to see if it can be taken with paracetamol. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure. There are no known problems caused by taking paracetamol with any specific foods or by drinking moderate amounts of alcohol while taking paracetamol. Side effects of paracetamol Side effects from paracetamol are rare but can include: an allergic reaction, which can cause a rash and swelling flushing, low blood pressure and a fast heartbeat \u2013 this can sometimes happen when paracetamol is given in hospital into a vein in your arm blood disorders, such as thrombocytopenia (low number of platelet cells) and leukopenia (low number of white blood cells) liver and kidney damage, if you take too much (overdose) \u2013 this can be fatal in severe cases Speak to a pharmacist or doctor if you develop any troublesome side effects that you think could be caused by paracetamol. You can also report suspected side effects using the Yellow Card Scheme. Overdoses of paracetamol Taking too much paracetamol, known as an overdose, can be very dangerous. If you've taken more than the recommended maximum dose, go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible. It can be helpful to take any remaining medicine and the box or leaflet with you to A&E if you can. Some people feel sick, vomit or have abdominal (tummy) pain after taking too much paracetamol, but often there are no obvious symptoms at first. Go to A&E even if you're feeling well. Page last reviewed: 18\/05\/2016 Next review due: 18\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 560 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ibuprofen Living with pain Choosing a painkiller Pharmacy and medicines External links Yellow Card Scheme Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child Medicines in pregnancy Find out which prescription and pharmacy remedies are safe to take in pregnancy Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Children's medicines","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/childrens-medicines.aspx","content":"Medicines for babies and children - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Medicines for babies and children Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Should my doctor give my child antibiotics? (from 6 months) Media last reviewed: 01\/05\/2015 Next review due: 01\/05\/2017 Medicines aren't always needed for childhood illnesses. Most illnesses get better by themselves, and make your child stronger and able to resist similar illnesses in the future. Painkillers for children Paracetamol and ibuprofen are often used to relieve the discomfort caused by a high temperature. Some children, such as those with asthma, may not be able to take ibuprofen, so check with your pharmacist, GP or health visitor. Both paracetamol and ibuprofen are safe and effective. Always have one or both stored in a safe place at home. Don't give aspirin to children under 16 unless it's specifically prescribed by a doctor. It has been linked with a rare but dangerous illness called Reye's syndrome. If you're breastfeeding, ask your health visitor, midwife or GP for advice before taking aspirin. Paracetamol for children Paracetamol can be given to children over two months old for pain and fever. Make sure you've got the right strength for your child. Overdosing is dangerous. Check with your pharmacist when you buy it, and read the label carefully. Ibuprofen for children Ibuprofen can be given for pain and fever in children of three months and over who weigh more than 5kg (11lbs). Check the correct dose for your child's age. Avoid ibuprofen if your child has asthma, unless advised by your GP. Antibiotics for children Children don't often need antibiotics. Most childhood infections are caused by viruses, and antibiotics only treat illnesses caused by bacteria, not viruses. If you're offered a prescription, especially an antibiotic, talk to your GP about why it's needed, how it will help, and whether there are any alternatives. Ask about any possible side effects \u2013 for example, whether it will make your child sleepy or irritable. If your child is prescribed antibiotics, always finish the whole course to make sure all the bacteria are killed off. Your child may seem better after two or three days, but if the course is five days, they must carry on taking the medicine. The illness is more likely to return if you don't finish all the antibiotics. Child medicine dosages Make sure you know how much and how often to give a medicine. Writing it in your child's Personal Child Health Record (PCHR, or red book) may help you remember. See Your baby's health and development reviews for more information on the red book. If in doubt, check with your pharmacist or GP. Never give the medicine more frequently than recommended by your GP or pharmacist. With liquids, always measure out the right dose for your child's age. The instructions will be on the bottle. Sometimes liquid medicine may have to be given using a special spoon or liquid medicine measure. This allows you to give small doses of medicine more accurately. Never use a kitchen teaspoon, as they vary in size. Ask your pharmacist or health visitor to explain how a measure should be used. Always read the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the measure, and always give the exact dose stated on the medicine bottle. If in doubt, ask the pharmacist for help. If you buy medicines at the pharmacy: Always tell the pharmacist how old your child is. Some medicines are for adult use only. Always follow the instructions on the label or ask the pharmacist if you're unsure. Ask for sugar-free medicines if they're available. Look for the date stamp. Don't use out-of-date medicines. If you have any out-of-date medicines at home, take them back to the pharmacy for safe disposal. Only give your child medicine given to you by your GP, pharmacist or usual healthcare professional. Never use medicines prescribed for anyone else. Keep all medicines out of your child's reach and out of sight, if possible. The kitchen is a good place to keep medicines as it's easy for you to keep an eye on them there. Put them in a place where they won't get warm. Children and side effects from medicine If you think your child is reacting badly to a medicine \u2013 for example, with a rash or diarrhoea \u2013 stop giving it to them and speak to a health professional. If you're worried that a symptom may be a side effect of a medicine: read the patient information leaflet supplied with the medicine \u2013 this lists the known side effects and advises you what to do call NHS 111, or speak to a pharmacist or your GP or practice nurse report the side effect through the Yellow Card Scheme \u2013 the scheme is run by the UK medicines watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA); Yellow Card reports are used as an early warning system to collect information on side effects and take necessary action to protect the public if there is a problem Keep a note of the medicine's name in your child's red book for future reference. Can you get over-the-counter children's medicines for free? Some pharmacies run what's known as a minor ailment scheme for specific ailments, such as coughs and colds and diarrhoea and vomiting. When pharmacies provide medicines as part of a minor ailment scheme, you get the medicines on the NHS. You won't pay a prescription charge for children under 16. Not all pharmacies offer a minor ailment scheme and the ailments covered by the scheme vary from area to area. Read more about the minor ailments scheme. Page last reviewed: 01\/09\/2015 Next review due: 01\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles  Common childhood illnesses How do I report a side effect from a medicine? If your child has to go into hospital Pharmacy and medicines  When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Roseola Most children will have been infected with roseola by the time they enter nursery school. They'll usually fight off the virus and recover fully within a week Treating a high temperature in children How to look after your child if they have a high temperature, and when to call the doctor Services near you Get help with all aspects of your parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Palliative care","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Planners\/end-of-life-care\/Pages\/what-is-end-of-life-care.aspx","content":"What is end of life care? - End of life care guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories End of life care What is end of life care? Planning ahead Your wellbeing What is end of life care? This section contains information about what you can expect during end of life care and the things you may want to think about. These include how and where you want to be cared for, as well as financial issues. Letting your family know about your wishes could help them if they ever have to make decisions about your care. Knowing that they are acting in accordance with your wishes can remove some of the stress from a very difficult situation. What end of life care involves, and when it starts What to expect from end of life care Where you can choose to receive your care Care at home Care in a care home Care in hospital Hospice care Getting information about benefits and coping financially Help from the NHS If you are not approaching the end of your life, you may still want to think about your wishes for your own end of life care. This could include where you would like to be cared for, where you would prefer to die, your wishes for your funeral and who you would like to make decisions about your care, if you are not able to decide for yourself. Useful links Why plan ahead  Coping with a terminal illness Talking to children  Download Planning for your future care (PDF, 292kb) Useful organisations Age UK: preparing for end of life Alzheimer's Society: end of life care British Heart Foundation: facing the end of life Cancer Research UK: dying with cancer Dementia UK Dying Matters: information about dying healthtalk.org: living with dying Hospice UK: about hospice care    Macmillan Cancer Support: advanced cancer Marie Curie: caring for people with terminal illness Motor Neurone Disease Association: end of life care National Council for Palliative Care Sue Ryder: support and services Services near you Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Anxiety Bereavement information and support services Cancer information and support Dementia Depression End of life hospice services GP Heart disease information and support Hospital Kidney disease information and support Neurology Pain management Pharmacy Stroke information and support Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Palpitations","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Heart-palpitations","content":"Heart palpitations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heart palpitations and ectopic beats  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Heart-palpitations Community Heart palpitations Introduction  Heart palpitations are heartbeats that suddenly become more noticeable. Your heart may feel like it's pounding, fluttering or beating irregularly, often for just a few seconds or minutes. You may also feel these sensations in your throat or neck. Palpitations may seem alarming, but in most cases they're harmless and are not a sign of a problem with your heart. Sometimes you may feel an extra or missed beat. These are known as 'ectopic beats', and are also usually nothing to worry about. However, palpitations accompanied by other symptoms, such as dizziness or tightness in your chest, can sometimes be a sign of a heart problem (see below). You should visit your GP if you have palpitations along with other symptoms or if you're concerned. What causes heart palpitations? Lifestyle triggers Palpitations may be triggered by a surge of adrenaline, a hormone your body releases after you have overexerted yourself or when you feel nervous, anxious or excited. Eating rich, spicy foods, drinking excessive amounts of caffeine or alcohol, smoking, and using recreational drugs can all bring on palpitations. If you think lifestyle factors are causing your palpitations, try to reduce your stress levels by using relaxation techniques and moderating the level of exercise you do. You should also reduce your intake of coffee or energy drinks and avoid using recreational drugs. Panic attacks If you have regular palpitations and also have feelings of anxiety, stress and panic, you may be experiencing panic attacks. A panic attack can cause an overwhelming sense of anxiety, fear and apprehension, accompanied by nausea, sweating, trembling and palpitations. Panic attacks can be frightening and intense, but aren't usually dangerous. Read more about panic attacks. Medication Less commonly, palpitations can be a side effect of some types of medicine, such as asthma inhalers or tablets for a thyroid problem. Speak to your GP if you think medication may be responsible for your palpitations. Don't stop taking a prescribed treatment without first consulting your GP. Periods, pregnancy and the menopause Palpitations can sometimes be the result of hormonal changes during a woman's periods, during pregnancy, or around the time of the menopause. However, these are usually only temporary and not a cause for concern. Medical conditions The following conditions can make the heart beat faster, stronger or irregularly, and can be a cause of heart palpitations: an overactive thyroid a low blood sugar level anaemia some types of low blood pressure  a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above  dehydration (not enough fluid in the body) a heart problem (see below) When you may have a heart problem If you start to experience palpitations more often, or if they get worse or occur with other symptoms such as dizziness or tightness in your chest, see your GP. You may have a heart rhythm problem (arrhythmia), such as atrial fibrillation or supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). There are also other, less common, heart rhythm conditions that may be the cause of your palpitations. These can be determined by appropriate tests. When your GP or hospital discovers the exact problem with your heart, ask them to explain it to you. Seeing your GP Your GP will often carry out an electrocardiogram (ECG) to assess your heart rate and rhythm. This may immediately confirm whether there's a problem and whether treatment is needed. However, the results of an ECG will often be completely normal if you're not having palpitations at the time of the test. Further tests may be needed, which may be carried out by your GP or local hospital. Atrial fibrillation Atrial fibrillation is one of the most common heart rhythm problems and is a major cause of stroke (a serious medical condition that can cause permanent disability). In the UK, atrial fibrillation affects up to 800,000 people, and is most common in those over 55 years of age. It causes a fast, irregular pulse, which can cause a persistent heart flutter. You may also feel dizzy, short of breath and very tired. Atrial fibrillation is not usually life threatening, but can be uncomfortable and often needs treating. Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a similar heart rhythm problem to atrial fibrillation. It also causes episodes of an abnormally fast heart rate, but the heart rate is often steady and not irregular. Episodes of SVT are usually harmless and tend to settle down on their own without the need for treatment. However, you should seek medical advice if you have prolonged episodes of SVT. Page last reviewed: 26\/11\/2014 Next review due: 26\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2334 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1216  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 654  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 145  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 248  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arrhythmia Atrial fibrillation Heart health Supraventricular tachycardia External links Anxiety UK Arrhythmia Alliance: patients British Heart Foundation: abnormal heart rhythms Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancolitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ulcerative-colitis","content":"Ulcerative colitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ulcerative colitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ulcerative-colitis Real stories Ulcerative-colitis Clinical trials Ulcerative colitis Ulcerative-colitis Causes Ulcerative-colitis Diagnosis Ulcerative-colitis Treatment Ulcerative-colitis Complications Ulcerative-colitis Living with Introduction  Ulcerative colitis is a long-term condition, where the colon and rectum become inflamed. The colon is the large intestine (bowel), and the rectum is the end of the bowel where stools are stored. Small ulcers can develop on the colon's lining, and can bleed and produce pus. Symptoms of ulcerative colitis The main symptoms of ulcerative colitis are: recurring diarrhoea, which may contain blood, mucus or pus abdominal (tummy) pain needing to empty your bowels frequently You may also experience fatigue (extreme tiredness), loss of appetite and weight loss. The severity of the symptoms varies, depending on how much of the rectum and colon is inflamed and how severe the inflammation is. For some people, the condition has a significant impact on their everyday lives. Symptoms of a flare-up Some people may go for weeks or months with very mild symptoms, or none at all (known as remission), followed by periods where the symptoms are particularly troublesome (known as flare-ups or relapses). During a flare-up, some people with ulcerative colitis also experience symptoms elsewhere in their body. For example, some people develop: painful and swollen joints (arthritis) mouth ulcers areas of painful, red and swollen skin irritated and red eyes In severe cases, defined as having to empty your bowels six or more times a day, additional symptoms may include: shortness of breath a fast or irregular heartbeat a high temperature (fever) blood in your stools becoming more obvious In most people, no specific trigger for flare-ups is identified, although a gut infection can occasionally be the cause. Stress is also thought to be a potential factor. Read more about living with ulcerative colitis. When to seek medical advice You should see your GP as soon as possible if you have symptoms of ulcerative colitis and you haven't been diagnosed with the condition. They can arrange blood or stool sample tests to help determine what may be causing your symptoms. If necessary, they can refer you to hospital for further tests. Read more about diagnosing ulcerative colitis. If you've been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis and think you may be having a severe flare-up, contact your GP or care team for advice. You may need to be admitted to hospital. If you can't contact your GP or care team, call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service. What causes ulcerative colitis? Ulcerative colitis is thought to be an autoimmune condition. This means the immune system \u2013 the body's defence against infection \u2013 goes wrong and attacks healthy tissue. The most popular theory is that the immune system mistakes harmless bacteria inside the colon for a threat and attacks the tissues of the colon, causing it to become inflamed. Exactly what causes the immune system to behave in this way is unclear. Most experts think it's a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Read more about the causes of ulcerative colitis. Who's affected? It's estimated that around 1 in every 420 people living in the UK has ulcerative colitis; this amounts to around 146,000 people. The condition can develop at any age, but is most often diagnosed in people from 15 to 25 years old. It's more common in white people of European descent (especially those descended from Ashkenazi Jewish communities) and black people. The condition is rarer in people from Asian backgrounds (although the reasons for this are unclear). Both men and women seem to be equally affected by ulcerative colitis. How ulcerative colitis is treated Treatment for ulcerative colitis aims to relieve symptoms during a flare-up and prevent symptoms from returning (known as maintaining remission). In most people, this is achieved by taking medication such as: aminosalicylates (ASAs) corticosteroids immunosuppressants Mild to moderate flare-ups can usually be treated at home. However, more severe flare-ups need to be treated in hospital to reduce the risk of serious complications, such as the colon becoming stretched and enlarged or developing large ulcers. Both of these can increase the risk of developing a hole in the bowel. If medications aren't effective at controlling your symptoms, or your quality of life is significantly affected by your condition, surgery to remove your colon may be an option. During surgery, your small intestine will either be diverted out of an opening in your abdomen (known as an ileostomy), or used to create an internal pouch that's connected to your anus (known as an ileo-anal pouch). Read more about: treating ulcerative colitis complications of ulcerative colitis IBD or IBS? Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a term mainly used to describe two conditions that cause inflammation of the gut (gastrointestinal tract). They are: ulcerative colitis Crohn's disease IBD shouldn't be confused with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which is a different condition and requires different treatment. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 17\/03\/2016 Next review due: 17\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 473 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 197  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 156  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Crohn's disease Diarrhoea Corticosteroids Ileostomy Bowel cancer External links Crohn's and Colitis UK Children with Colitis The Ileostomy and Internal Pouch Support Group NICE: managing ulcerative colitis IBD Standards NICE: infliximab for ulcerative colitis Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Find and choose services for Ulcerative colitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreas transplant","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pancreastransplant","content":"Pancreas transplant - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pancreas transplant  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pancreastransplant Real stories pancreastransplant Clinical trials Pancreas transplant pancreastransplant Who can have one pancreastransplant Waiting list pancreastransplant What happens pancreastransplant Recovery pancreastransplant Risks   A pancreas transplant is an operation to treat diabetes by replacing the need for insulin with a healthy insulin-producing pancreas from a donor who has recently died. The pancreas is an organ in the abdomen that produces both digestive juices and hormones, such as insulin, that help the body break down food and turn it into energy. A pancreas transplant is sometimes recommended as a treatment for people with insulin-treated diabetes, such as type 1 diabetes, who are unable to produce their own insulin. This page covers: Why they're carried out What happens Recovery Risks Outlook Why pancreas transplants are carried out A pancreas transplant allows people with type 1 diabetes to produce insulin again. It is not a routine treatment because it carries significant risks, and treatment with insulin injections is often effective. A pancreas transplant is usually only considered if: you also have severe kidney disease \u2013 a pancreas transplant may be carried out at the same time as a kidney transplant in these cases you have severe episodes of dangerously low blood sugar levels (hypoglycaemia) that occur without warning and aren't controlled with insulin If your doctor thinks you might benefit from a pancreas transplant, you'll need to have a detailed assessment to check whether you're healthy enough to have one, before being placed on a waiting list. Read more about who can have a pancreas transplant and being on the pancreas transplant waiting list. What happens during a pancreas transplant A pancreas transplant needs to be carried out as soon as possible after a donor pancreas becomes available. The procedure is performed under general anaesthetic, where you're asleep. A cut (incision) is made along your tummy. The donor pancreas \u2013 and donor kidney, if you're having a kidney transplant at the same time \u2013 is then placed inside, and attached to nearby blood vessels and your bowel. The new pancreas should start producing insulin straight away. Your old damaged pancreas will be left in place and will continue to produce important digestive juices after the transplant. Read more about how a pancreas transplant is performed. Recovering from a pancreas transplant You'll usually need to stay in hospital for around two or three weeks after a pancreas transplant. Most people are able to get back to their normal activities within a few months. Your transplant team can give you advice about how long you may need to avoid certain activities during your recovery. You'll need to have regular check-ups with your transplant team after the transplant. You'll also need to take medications called immunosuppressants for the rest of your life. Without these medicines, your body will recognise your new pancreas as foreign and attack it \u2013 this is known as rejection. Read more about recovering from a pancreas transplant. Risks of a pancreas transplant A pancreas transplant is a complex and risky procedure. Possible complications include: the immune system recognising the transplanted pancreas as foreign and attacking it (rejection) blood clots forming in the blood vessels supplying the donor pancreas (thrombosis) short-lived inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), usually just after transplantation side effects from the immunosuppressant medication, such as an increased chance of catching certain infections, developing high blood pressure, and weakened bones (osteoporosis) Many of these problems are treatable, although sometimes it may be necessary to remove the donor pancreas. Read more about the risks associated with a pancreas transplant. Outlook for a pancreas transplant The outlook for people with a pancreas transplant is usually good: most people live for many years, or even decades, after a pancreas transplant \u2013 97% will live at least a year afterwards, and almost 90% will live at least five years for people who had a pancreas and kidney transplant together \u2013 around 85% of donor pancreases are still working after one year, and around 75% are still working after five years for people who just had a pancreas transplant \u2013 around 65% of donor pancreases are still working after one year, and around 45% are still working after five years The donor pancreas can be removed if it stops working, and it may be possible to put you back on the waiting list for another transplant. The NHS Organ Donor Register If you're interested in donating your organs after you die, you can join the NHS Organ Donor Register. Joining the NHS Organ Donor Register is quick and simple, and will only take a few minutes of your time. You can remove yourself from the register at any time, and you can specify what you're willing to donate. Page last reviewed: 20\/06\/2016 Next review due: 20\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 41 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Kidney and pancreas double transplant: Ivy's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out how a double kidney and pancreas transplant has transformed former diabetic Ivy's life. Media last reviewed: 04\/02\/2015 Next review due: 04\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Kidney transplant Living with diabetes Organ donation Type 1 diabetes External links NHS Organ Donation Register Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreatic cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-pancreas","content":"Pancreatic cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pancreatic cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-pancreas Real stories Cancer-of-the-pancreas Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-pancreas Community Pancreatic cancer Cancer-of-the-pancreas Treatment   Pancreatic cancer is caused by the abnormal and uncontrolled growth of cells in the pancreas \u2013 a large gland that's part of the digestive system. Around half of all new cases are diagnosed in people aged 75 or over. It's uncommon in people under 40 years of age. This page covers: Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Recovering from surgery Symptoms of pancreatic cancer In the early stages, a tumour in the pancreas doesn't usually cause any symptoms, which can make it difficult to diagnose. It's important to remember that these symptoms can be caused by many different conditions, and aren't usually the result of cancer. But you should contact your GP if you're concerned, or if these symptoms start suddenly. The first noticeable symptoms of pancreatic cancer are often: pain in the back or stomach area \u2013 which may come and go at first and is often worse when you lie down or after you've eaten unexpected weight loss jaundice \u2013 the most obvious sign is yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes; it also causes your urine to be dark yellow or orange and your stools (faeces) to be pale-coloured Other possible symptoms of pancreatic cancer include: nausea and vomiting bowel changes fever and shivering indigestion blood clots You may also develop symptoms of diabetes if you have pancreatic cancer, because it can produce chemicals that interfere with the normal effect of insulin. Endocrine pancreatic cancer There are also a number of different endocrine tumours that cause different symptoms, depending on the hormone the tumour produces. Cancer Research UK has more information on symptoms of endocrine pancreatic tumours. Causes of pancreatic cancer It's not fully understood what causes pancreatic cancer, but a number of risk factors for developing the condition have been identified. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include: age \u2013 it mainly affects people who are 50-80 years of age  smoking \u2013 around one in three cases is associated with using cigarettes, cigars or chewing tobacco having a history of certain health conditions \u2013 such as diabetes, chronic pancreatitis (long-term inflammation of the pancreas), stomach ulcer and Helicobacter pylori infection (a stomach infection) In about 1 in 10 cases, pancreatic cancer is inherited from a person's parents. Certain genes also increase your chances of getting pancreatitis, which in turn increases your risk of developing cancer of the pancreas. Cancer Research UK has more information on: genetic risk factors for pancreatic cancer other possible risk factors for pancreatic cancer Diagnosing pancreatic cancer Your GP will first ask about your general health and carry out a physical examination. They may examine your tummy (abdomen) for a lump and to see whether your liver is enlarged. They'll also check your skin and eyes for signs of jaundice and may request a urine sample and blood test. If your GP suspects pancreatic cancer, you'll usually be referred to a specialist at a hospital for further investigation. You may have either: an ultrasound scan a computerised tomography (CT) scan a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan a positron emission tomography (PET) scan \u2013 where you're given an injection of a very small amount of radioactive medication, known as a tracer, which helps to show up cancers in an image Depending on the results of a scan, further tests may include: an endoluminal ultrasonography (EUS) endoscopy \u2013 a type of endoscopy which allows close-up ultrasound pictures to be taken of your pancreas  an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) \u2013 a type of endoscopy which is used to inject a special dye into your bile and pancreatic ducts; the dye will show up on an X-ray and highlight any tumours a laparoscopy \u2013 a surgical procedure that allows the surgeon to see inside your body using a laparoscopy (a thin, flexible microscope) A biopsy, where a small sample is taken from a suspected tumour, may also be carried out during these procedures. NICE guidelines In 2015, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) published guidelines to help GPs recognise the signs and symptoms of pancreatic cancer and refer people for the right tests faster. To find out if you should be referred for further tests for suspected pancreatic cancer, read the NICE 2015 guidelines on Suspected Cancer: Recognition and Referral. Treating pancreatic cancer Cancer of the pancreas is difficult to treat. It rarely causes any symptoms in the early stages, so it's often not detected until the cancer is fairly advanced. If the tumour is large, treating the cancer will be more difficult. If you've been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, your treatment will depend on the type and location of your cancer, and how far it's advanced. Your age, general health and personal preferences will also be taken into consideration. The first aim will be to completely remove the tumour and any other cancerous cells. If this isn't possible, treatment will focus on preventing the tumour growing and causing further harm to your body. The three main treatments for pancreatic cancer are: surgery chemotherapy radiotherapy Some types of pancreatic cancer only require one form of treatment, whereas others may require two types of treatment or a combination of all three. Read more about treating pancreatic cancer. Recovering from surgery Recovering from pancreatic cancer surgery can be a long and difficult process. You'll probably experience some pain after your operation. The staff at your hospital will make sure you have adequate pain relief. After any type of surgery to your digestive system, your bowel will temporarily stop working. This means you won't be able to eat or drink straight away. You'll gradually be able to sip fluids, before eventually being able to drink and eat more regularly. You may be referred to a dietitian, who can advise you about what foods you should eat following your operation. After the tumour has been removed, you'll probably have a six-month course of chemotherapy, which greatly increases your chance of being cured. But because cancer of the pancreas is difficult to diagnose and treat, many people don't recover completely. Treatment can be very effective in helping to ease symptoms and make you as comfortable as possible. Chemotherapy can help shrink your tumour and slow down its growth. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 24\/06\/2016 Next review due: 24\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 300 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 152  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 89  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Chemotherapy Chronic pancreatitis Find cancer support services Having an operation Radiotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: pancreatic cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Lab Tests Online UK Macmillan Cancer Support: pancreatic cancer Pancreatic Cancer UK The Royal Marsden Operation Henry Pancreatic Cancer Action Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Reduce your cancer risk Eating a balanced diet, being a healthy weight and drinking less alcohol could reduce your cancer risk Find and choose services for Pancreatic cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreatitis, acute","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pancreatitis","content":"Acute pancreatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Acute pancreatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pancreatitis Clinical trials Acute pancreatitis Pancreatitis Symptoms Pancreatitis Causes Pancreatitis Diagnosis Pancreatitis Treatment Pancreatitis Complications Pancreatitis Prevention Introduction  Acute pancreatitis is a serious condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed over a short period of time. The pancreas is a small organ located behind the stomach and below the ribcage. Most people with acute pancreatitis improve within a week and experience no further problems, but severe cases can have serious complications and can even be fatal. Acute pancreatitis is different to chronic pancreatitis, where the inflammation of the pancreas persists for many years. The most common symptoms of acute pancreatitis include: suddenly getting severe pain in the centre of your abdomen (tummy) feeling or being sick diarrhoea Read more about the symptoms of acute pancreatitis and diagnosing acute pancreatitis. When to seek medical help Contact your GP immediately if you suddenly develop severe abdominal pain. If this isn't possible, contact NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service for advice. Why it happens It's thought that acute pancreatitis occurs when a problem develops with some of the enzymes (chemicals) in the pancreas, which causes them to try to digest the organ. Acute pancreatitis is most often linked to: gallstones \u2013 which accounts for around half of all cases alcohol consumption \u2013 which accounts for about a quarter of all cases By reducing your alcohol intake and altering your diet to make gallstones less likely, you can help to reduce your chances of developing acute pancreatitis. Read more about the causes of acute pancreatitis and preventing acute pancreatitis. Who is affected? Acute pancreatitis is more common in middle-aged and elderly people, but it can affect people of any age. Men are more likely to develop alcohol-related pancreatitis, while women are more likely to develop it as a result of gallstones. In England, more than 25,000 people were admitted to hospital with acute pancreatitis between 2013 and 2014.  How it's treated Treatment for acute pancreatitis focuses on supporting the functions of the body until the inflammation has passed. This usually involves admission to hospital so you can be given fluids into a vein (intravenous fluids), as well as pain relief, nutritional support and oxygen through tubes into your nose. Most people with acute pancreatitis improve within a week and are well enough to leave hospital after 5-10 days. However, recovery takes longer in severe cases, as complications that require additional treatment may develop. Read more about treating acute pancreatitis. Complications About four out of five cases of acute pancreatitis improve quickly and don't cause any serious further problems. However, one in five cases are severe and can result in life-threatening complications, such as multiple organ failure. In severe cases where complications develop, there's a high risk of the condition being fatal. In England, just over 1,000 people die from acute pancreatitis every year. If a person survives the effects of severe acute pancreatitis, it's likely to be several weeks or months before they're well enough to leave hospital. Read more about the possible complications of acute pancreatitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2015 Next review due: 02\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 853 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 437  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 243  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chronic pancreatitis Drinking and alcohol Food and diet Gallstones External links British Liver Trust CORE charity Lab Tests Online UK: lipase test Food and diet Find out how to achieve a healthy, nutritious diet to help you look and feel your best Drinking and alcohol Practical tips to help you cut down, plus information on low-risk drinking, how alcohol affects your health, and understanding units Find and choose services for Pancreatitis, acute Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pancreatitis, chronic","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pancreatitis-chronic","content":"Chronic pancreatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chronic pancreatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pancreatitis-chronic Real stories Pancreatitis-chronic Clinical trials Chronic pancreatitis Pancreatitis-chronic Symptoms Pancreatitis-chronic Causes Pancreatitis-chronic Diagnosis Pancreatitis-chronic Treatment Pancreatitis-chronic Complications Introduction  Chronic pancreatitis is a condition where the pancreas (a small organ located behind the stomach and below the ribcage) becomes permanently damaged from inflammation. It's different to acute pancreatitis, where the inflammation is only short-term. The most common symptom of chronic pancreatitis is repeated episodes of abdominal (tummy) pain, which can be severe. Other symptoms tend to develop as the damage to the pancreas progresses, such as producing greasy, foul-smelling stools. Read more about the symptoms of chronic pancreatitis and diagnosing chronic pancreatitis. When to seek medical advice Always visit your GP if you're experiencing severe pain \u2013 it's a warning sign that something is wrong. Why it happens Long-term alcohol misuse is responsible for around 7 out of every 10 cases of chronic pancreatitis. This is because heavy drinking over a number of years can repeatedly damage the pancreas. Less common causes include: smoking a problem with the immune system, causing it to attack the pancreas an inherited genetic mutation disrupting the functions of the pancreas In as many as 3 out of 10 people with the condition, the cause cannot be identified \u2013 this is known as \"idiopathic\" chronic pancreatitis. Read more about the causes of chronic pancreatitis. Who's affected Chronic pancreatitis can affect people of any age, but is most common in middle-aged men aged between 45 and 54. Between 2012 and 2013, over 35,000 people visited hospitals in England with the condition. How it's treated In most cases of chronic pancreatitis, there's no specific treatment to reduce the inflammation and repair the damage to the pancreas. Treatment mainly focuses on lifestyle changes (see below) and medication to relieve the pain. Surgery is sometimes needed to treat severe chronic pain that doesn't respond to painkillers. However, the pain can be difficult to treat and can seriously affect your quality of life. People who don't smoke cigarettes and avoid drinking alcohol tend to experience less pain and live longer than those who continue to drink and smoke after receiving a diagnosis. Read more about treating chronic pancreatitis. Complications Living with chronic pain can cause mental as well as physical strain. It's important to speak to your GP if you're experiencing stress, anxiety or depression caused by chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes is a common complication of chronic pancreatitis and affects about a third of people with the condition. It occurs when the pancreas is damaged and unable to produce insulin. People with chronic pancreatitis also have an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Read more about the possible complications of chronic pancreatitis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/03\/2015 Next review due: 05\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 132 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol misuse Diabetes Acute pancreatitis Pancreatic cancer Drinking and alcohol External links CORE charity NICE guidance: autologous pancreatic islet cell transplantation for improved glycaemic control after pancreatectomy The risks of drinking too much You don't have to be an alcoholic to risk damaging your health. Regularly drinking just above recommended levels can be harmful NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Panic disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Panic-disorder","content":"Panic disorder - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Panic disorder  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Panic-disorder Real stories Panic-disorder Clinical trials Panic disorder Panic-disorder Symptoms Panic-disorder Causes Panic-disorder Diagnosis Panic-disorder Treatment Panic-disorder Self-help Panic-disorder Complications Introduction  Panic disorder is where you have recurring and regular panic attacks, often for no apparent reason. Everyone experiences feelings of anxiety and panic at certain times during their lifetime. It's a natural response to stressful or dangerous situations. However, for someone with panic disorder, feelings of anxiety, stress and panic occur regularly and at any time. Anxiety Anxiety is a feeling of unease. It can range from mild to severe and can include feelings of worry and fear. There are several conditions that can cause severe anxiety including phobias \u2013 an extreme or irrational fear of an object, place, situation, feeling or animal generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) \u2013 a long-term condition that causes excessive anxiety and worry relating to a variety of situations post-traumatic stress disorder \u2013 a condition with psychological and physical symptoms caused by distressing or frightening events Panic attacks A panic attack occurs when your body experiences a rush of intense psychological (mental) and physical symptoms. You may experience an overwhelming sense of fear, apprehension and anxiety. As well as these feelings, you may also have physical symptoms such as: nausea sweating trembling a sensation that your heart is beating irregularly (palpitations) The number of panic attacks you have will depend on how severe your condition is. Some people may have one or two attacks each month, while others may have several attacks a week. Read more about the symptoms of panic disorder. Panic attacks can be very frightening and intense, but they're not dangerous. An attack won't cause you any physical harm, and it's unlikely that you'll be admitted to hospital if you've had a panic attack. What causes panic disorder? As with many mental health conditions, the exact cause of panic disorder isn't fully understood. However, it's thought the condition is probably linked to a combination of physical and psychological factors. Read about the possible causes of panic disorder. It\u2019s important to be aware that some physical conditions and disorders can have similar symptoms to those of anxiety. For example: mitral valve prolapse postural orthostatic tachycardic syndrome (POTS) anaemia paroxysmal atrial tachycardia \u2013 episodes of rapid and regular heartbeats that begin and end abruptly thyrotoxicosis \u2013 where large amounts of thyroid hormones are released into the bloodstream, causing rapid heartbeat, sweating, tremor and anxiety poorly controlled diabetes adrenal tumours \u2013 growths that develop on the adrenal glands (two triangular-shaped glands that form part of the kidneys) carcinoid syndrome \u2013 a set of symptoms caused by some carcinoid tumours that can develop in the cells of the endocrine system (glands that produce and secrete hormones) Zollinger-Ellison syndrome \u2013 causes overproduction of insulin and low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia) Diagnosing panic disorder See your GP if you have symptoms of anxiety or panic disorder (see above). You may be diagnosed with panic disorder if you experience recurrent and unexpected panic attacks followed by at least one month of continuous worry or concern about having further attacks. Read more about how panic disorder is diagnosed. Treating panic disorder The aim of treating panic disorder is to reduce the number of panic attacks you have and ease the severity of your symptoms. Psychological therapy and medication are the two main types of treatment for panic disorder. Read more about treating panic disorder and things you can do to help yourself during a panic attack. Having panic disorder may affect your ability to drive. It's your legal obligation to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) about a medical condition that could have an impact on your driving ability. GOV.UK has further information and advice about driving with a disability or health condition. Complications of panic disorder Panic disorder is treatable, but to make a full recovery it's important that you seek medical help as soon as possible. Treatment for panic disorder is much more effective if it's given at an early stage. Left untreated, panic disorder can become a very debilitating and isolating illness. It can also increase your risk of developing other mental health conditions, such as agoraphobia or other phobias. Agoraphobia is a fear of being in situations where escape might be difficult, or help wouldn't be available if things go wrong. Read more about the complications of panic disorder. Panic disorder Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A clinical psychologist describes the symptoms of panic disorder, the treatments available, and what to do if someone you know has a panic attack. Media last reviewed: 25\/04\/2015 Next review due: 25\/04\/2017 How common is panic disorder? At least one in 10 people experience occasional panic attacks, which are usually triggered by a stressful event. Panic disorder is where a person has recurring and regular panic attacks. In the UK, it affects about two in 100 people, and it's about twice as common in women as it is in men. Dealing with panic attacks Anxious? Dizzy? Heart racing? You could be having a panic attack. Get practical tips on how to cope Page last reviewed: 15\/08\/2014 Next review due: 15\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 382 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 163  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Agoraphobia Clinical depression Cognitive behavioural therapy Find depression support services Panic attacks Phobias Social anxiety disorder SSRIs Stress, anxiety and depression External links Mental Health Foundation: panic attacks Mind: anxiety and panic attacks Moodjuice: panic self-help guide Time to Change: mental health support at work Triumph Over Phobia: what is a phobia? Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better Social anxiety disorder Social anxiety disorder, or social phobia, is a persistent and overwhelming fear of social situations, which may cause embarrassment NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Panniculitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/panniculitis","content":"Panniculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Panniculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Panniculitis Introduction  Panniculitis is a broad term refering to inflammation of the fatty layer underneath the skin. It's usually seen in women, on the thighs and lower legs. There are many types of panniculitis \u2013 with different causes \u2013 but the condition generally causes the skin to feel hard and to develop painful red lumps (nodules) or patches (plaques), making it look darker in places. Panniculitis usually affects the shins and calves, but may spread to the thighs, forearms and chest. It tends to clear up within six weeks, fading like a bruise, usually without scarring. When the inflammation has settled, a depression in the skin may be left, which can be temporary or permanent. Many people get recurring bouts of panniculitis. Other symptoms As well as skin symptoms, panniculitis may also be associated with: fever fatigue weight loss nausea and vomiting joint pain What are the causes? There are a wide range of possible causes of panniculitis, although often the cause is not known. Common causes include: an infection \u2013 usually a viral or bacterial infection, but sometimes tuberculosis an inflammatory disease such as Crohn\u2019s disease or ulcerative colitis some medicines, including the oral contraceptive pill or sulphonamides (a group of antibiotics) sarcoidosis \u2013 a rare disease that causes body cells to form into clumps, called granulomas, in the lungs and skin leukaemia (cancer of the white blood cells) or lymphoma (cancer of the lymphatic system, part of your immune system) Some cases of panniculitis may be caused by the body's immune system mistakenly attacking the fat cells. Types of panniculitis The layer of fat underneath the skin is made of lobules (groups of fat cells) held together by connective tissue. Doctors sometimes classify the disease as either: \u2018mostly septal\u2019 \u2013 the inflammation mostly affects the connective tissue \u2018mostly lobular\u2019 \u2013 it mostly affects the fat lobules Some people will also have vasculitis, where the immune system attacks the body's blood vessels. If a blood vessel is inflamed, it can narrow or close off, this can limit, or even prevent, blood flow through the vessel and potentially damage organs. The most common type of panniculitis is erythema nodosum, which affects the shins. In about half of all cases of erythema nodosum, the cause is unknown. A similar form of the disease is Weber-Christian disease, also known as idiopathic lobular panniculitis (idiopathic means \u2018unknown cause\u2019). This most commonly affects the thighs and lower legs of women aged 30-60, and can also cause the non-skin symptoms mentioned above, such as fever and fatigue. Other types include: erythema induratum (nodular vasculitis), which usually affects the calves of young women and is often caused by tuberculosis cold panniculitis, which affects areas of skin exposed to the cold \u2013 for example, it can affect the cheeks and forehead of infants and children subcutaneous sarcoidosis, when the cause is the rare disease sarcoidosis A full list of all the different types of panniculitis can be found on DermNet NZ, which provides pictures and detailed information on the specific types. How is panniculitis treated? Doctors will aim to treat the underlying cause of the panniculitis, if known, and relieve some of the symptoms. While treatment is underway, you will be asked to ensure you get enough rest and to elevate the affected area when possible. Treatments will vary; for example, if panniculitis is triggered by medication, this medicine should be stopped \u2013 but don't stop taking any medication without first speaking to your GP. If the cause is a bacterial infection, you will be prescribed anti-inflammatory antibiotics, such as tetracycline, to clear the infection. If the cause is sarcoidosis, you may not need any medical treatment as the disease often goes away on its own with time (usually a couple of years). Often, simple lifestyle changes, over the counter painkillers, and support bandages are all that is needed to control any flare ups. Read more about managing sarcoidosis.  The following treatments may help to relieve symptoms: Joint pain and painful skin nodules can be relieved with anti-inflammatory painkillers (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. A solution of potassium iodide may help to relieve symptoms \u2013 this is thought to have an effect on white blood cells (read more about potassium iodide treatment for skin conditions). The inflammation may occasionally be treated with steroid cream, steroid tablets or injections, or immunosuppressants (drugs to weaken the immune system), if the immune system is responsible. If the condition is severe and the above treatments don't help, you may wish to consider surgical removal of particularly bad patches of skin. Your GP will refer you to a dermatologist (skin specialist) to discuss the pros and cons of surgery. Community content from HealthUnlocked Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2014 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 74 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links NSAID painkillers External links British Association of Dermatologists Sarcoidosis Everything you need to know about this rare condition, including advice on living with sarcoidosis NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paracetamol","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Painkillers-paracetamol","content":"Paracetamol - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Paracetamol  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Painkillers-paracetamol Clinical trials Paracetamol   Paracetamol is a commonly used medicine that can help treat pain and reduce a high temperature (fever). It's typically used to relieve mild or moderate pain, such as headaches, toothache or sprains, and reduce fevers caused by illnesses such as colds and flu. Paracetamol is often recommended as one of the first treatments for pain, as it's safe for most people to take and side effects are rare. This page covers: Types of paracetamol Who can take it How to take it Taking it with other medicines, food and alcohol Side effects Overdoses and extra doses Types of paracetamol You can buy most types of paracetamol from supermarkets or pharmacies. Some types are only available on prescription. Paracetamol is available as: tablets or caplets capsules liquid \u2013 usually for children soluble tablets (tablets that dissolve in water to make a drink) suppositories (capsules inserted into the back passage) an injection given into a vein \u2013 normally only used in hospital In some products, such as cold and flu remedies or certain combination painkillers, paracetamol is combined with other ingredients. It may be sold under the name paracetamol, or under various brand names (which may also contain other ingredients). Who can take paracetamol Most people can take paracetamol safely, including: pregnant women breastfeeding women children over two months of age \u2013 lower doses are recommended for young children (see How to take paracetamol below) If you're not sure whether you can take paracetamol, check the leaflet that comes with it or ask your pharmacist or doctor for advice. Always get advice before taking paracetamol if you: have liver or kidney problems have problems with alcohol, such as long-term alcohol misuse are very underweight are taking other medications (see Interactions with other medicines below) Don't take paracetamol if you've had an allergic reaction to it in the past. How to take paracetamol Make sure you take paracetamol as directed on the label or leaflet, or as instructed by a health professional. How much you can take depends on your age, your weight, the type of paracetamol you're taking and how strong it is. For example: Adults can usually take one or two 500mg tablets every 4-6 hours, but shouldn't take more than 4g (eight 500mg tablets) in the space of 24 hours. Children under 16 need to take a lower dose, depending on their age or weight \u2013 check the packet or leaflet, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice. For very young children, paracetamol liquid is given using a measuring spoon or an oral syringe. Paracetamol should start to work within an hour and the effect usually lasts several hours. Don't take more than the recommended dose if it isn't relieving your symptoms. Adults can take ibuprofen at the same time if necessary, but this isn't usually recommended for children. For more details, see Can I take paracetamol and ibuprofen together? Contact your GP or call NHS 111 if your symptoms get worse or last more than three days despite taking paracetamol. Be careful not to use other medications that contain paracetamol as an ingredient (such as some cold and flu remedies) while you're taking paracetamol. Taking paracetamol with other medicines, food and alcohol Paracetamol can react unpredictably with certain other medications. This can affect how well either medicine works and might increase the risk of side effects. It may not be safe to take paracetamol at the same time as: other products containing paracetamol \u2013 including combination products where paracetamol is one of the ingredients carbamazepine \u2013 used to treat epilepsy and some types of pain colestyramine \u2013 used to reduce itchiness caused by primary biliary cirrhosis (a type of liver disease) imatinib and busulfan \u2013 used to treat certain types of cancer ketoconazole \u2013 a type of antifungal medicine lixisenatide \u2013 used to treat type 2 diabetes metoclopramide \u2013 used to relieve nausea and vomiting phenobarbital, phenytoin and primidone \u2013 used to control seizures warfarin \u2013 used to prevent blood clots Check the leaflet that comes with your medicine to see if it can be taken with paracetamol. Ask a pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure. There are no known problems caused by taking paracetamol with any specific foods or by drinking moderate amounts of alcohol while taking paracetamol. Side effects of paracetamol Side effects from paracetamol are rare but can include: an allergic reaction, which can cause a rash and swelling flushing, low blood pressure and a fast heartbeat \u2013 this can sometimes happen when paracetamol is given in hospital into a vein in your arm blood disorders, such as thrombocytopenia (low number of platelet cells) and leukopenia (low number of white blood cells) liver and kidney damage, if you take too much (overdose) \u2013 this can be fatal in severe cases Speak to a pharmacist or doctor if you develop any troublesome side effects that you think could be caused by paracetamol. You can also report suspected side effects using the Yellow Card Scheme. Overdoses of paracetamol Taking too much paracetamol, known as an overdose, can be very dangerous. If you've taken more than the recommended maximum dose, go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department as soon as possible. It can be helpful to take any remaining medicine and the box or leaflet with you to A&E if you can. Some people feel sick, vomit or have abdominal (tummy) pain after taking too much paracetamol, but often there are no obvious symptoms at first. Go to A&E even if you're feeling well. Page last reviewed: 18\/05\/2016 Next review due: 18\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 560 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 120  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ibuprofen Living with pain Choosing a painkiller Pharmacy and medicines External links Yellow Card Scheme Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child Medicines in pregnancy Find out which prescription and pharmacy remedies are safe to take in pregnancy Pharmacy and medicines Using your local pharmacy's services could save you an unnecessary trip to your GP NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paraesthesia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pins-and-needles","content":"Pins and needles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pins and needles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Pins and needles (paraesthesia) is a pricking, burning, tingling or numbing sensation that's usually felt in the arms, legs, hands or feet. It doesn't usually cause any pain, but it can cause numbness or itching. Pins and needles is usually temporary, but can sometimes be long-lasting (chronic). Temporary pins and needles Most people have temporary pins and needles from time to time. It happens when pressure is applied to a part of the body, which cuts off the blood supply to the nerves in that area. This prevents the nerves from sending important signals to the brain. Putting weight on a body part (for example, by kneeling) or wearing tight shoes or socks can potentially cause pins and needles. Temporary pins and needles can be eased by simply taking the pressure off the affected area. This allows your blood supply to return, relieving the numbness or tingling sensation. Other common reasons for temporary pins and needles include: a condition known as Raynaud's disease \u2013 which affects the blood supply to certain areas of the body, such as the fingers and toes, and is usually triggered by cold temperatures or sometimes anxiety or stress hyperventilating (breathing too quickly) Long-lasting pins and needles Sometimes, pins and needles can occur over a long period of time. It can be a sign of a wide range of health conditions, including: diabetes \u2013 a condition in which there is too much glucose in the blood. a compressed ulnar nerve \u2013 the ulnar nerve starts in your neck and runs down the inside of your upper arm to your elbow, then down to the little finger side of your hand; it can be compressed at any point, but the elbow is most commonly affected carpal tunnel syndrome \u2013 pain, numbness and a burning or tingling sensation in the hand caused by a build-up of pressure in the small tunnel that runs from the wrist to the lower palm (the carpal tunnel) sciatica \u2013 pain caused by irritation or compression of the sciatic nerve, which runs from the back of your pelvis, through your buttocks and down both legs to your feet Persistent pins and needles can also occur after an injury, or be caused by certain treatments, such as chemotherapy. When to see your GP Most cases of pins and needles are temporary and the sensation disappears after the pressure is taken off the affected area. See your GP if you constantly have pins and needles or if it keeps coming back. It may be a sign of a more serious underlying health condition. Treatment for chronic pins and needles depends on the cause. For example, if it's caused by diabetes, treatment will focus on controlling your blood glucose levels. Other causes Long-lasting pins and needles may also be caused by: a condition that damages the nervous system \u2013 such as a stroke, multiple sclerosis or in extremely rare cases, a brain tumour exposure to toxic substances \u2013 such as lead or radiation certain types of medication \u2013 such as HIV medication, medication to prevent seizures (anticonvulsants), or some antibiotics  malnutrition \u2013 where the body lacks important nutrients because of a poor diet a vitamin B12 deficiency nerve damage caused by infection, injury or overuse \u2013 for example, a condition known as hand-arm vibration syndrome may be the result of regularly using vibrating tools alcohol misuse cervical spondylosis \u2013 the bones and tissues of the spine can wear down over time, leading to trapped nerves and occasionally pins and needles Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2016 Next review due: 01\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2348 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 834  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 721  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 268  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 393  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Diabetes Itching Raynaud's disease Sciatica External links Multiple Sclerosis Trust NINDS: paraesthesia Stroke Association Itching Itching is a common symptom that can be caused by a number of conditions. Find out why it happens and what you can do about it Raynaud's phenomenon Raynaud's phenomenon is a common condition of the blood vessels that supply blood to the skin. Find out more Living with diabetes How to live healthily with diabetes, including advice on diet and lifestyle NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paralysis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Paralysis","content":"Paralysis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Paralysis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Paralysis paralysis Symptoms paralysis Causes paralysis Diagnosis paralysis Treatment paralysis Complications paralysis Living with Introduction  Paralysis is loss of the ability to move one or more muscles. It may be associated with loss of feeling and other bodily functions. It is not usually caused by problems with the muscles themselves, but by problems with the nerves or spinal cord the brain uses to control muscles. A person with paralysis will usually have some form of nerve damage. Classifying paralysis Paralysis can be: localised \u2013 where a specific section of the body is paralysed, such as the face or hand generalised \u2013 where a larger area of the body is affected There are also a number of medical terms used to describe different types of paralysis. For example: monoplegia \u2013 where one limb is paralysed hemiplegia \u2013 where the arm and leg on one side of the body are paralysed paraplegia \u2013 where both legs and sometimes the pelvis and some of the lower body are paralysed tetraplegia \u2013 where both the arms and legs are paralysed (also known as quadriplegia) Read more about how paralysis is classified. What causes paralysis? The three most common causes of paralysis are: stroke head injury  spinal cord injury \u2013 the spinal cord is made up of nerves that run through the spine and help control the body's muscles multiple sclerosis Sometimes paralysis can also occur as a result of a number of other conditions, such as cerebral palsy and Guillain-Barré syndrome.  Read more about the causes of paralysis. Living with paralysis The type and extent of paralysis will determine the impact it has on a person's quality of life and day-to-day activities. For example, a person who has lower limb paralysis (paraplegia) will usually be able to lead a relatively independent and active life, using a wheelchair to carry out their daily activities. But a person with paralysis that affects both their arms and their legs (tetraplegia\/quadriplegia) will need a great deal of support, and it is unlikely they will be able to live without a dedicated carer. Paralysis can also cause a number of associated secondary conditions, such as urinary incontinence (an inability to control the flow of urine) and bowel incontinence (where stools leak from the back passage). It may also affect sexual function in both men and women. There is currently no cure for paralysis, except in certain conditions. In cases of permanent paralysis, treatment aims to: help a person live as independently as possible address any associated complications that arise from paralysis, such as pressure ulcers (sores that develop when the affected area of tissue is placed under too much pressure) address bladder and bowel problems that are secondary to paralysis treat spasms and complications resulting from paralysis Mobility aids such as wheelchairs and orthoses can help a person with paralysis. Manual wheelchairs are designed for people with good upper body strength. Electric wheelchairs are designed for people with poor upper body muscle strength or paralysis in all four limbs. The NHS supplies wheelchairs free of charge, but the range of models available is often limited. If you want a more sophisticated model, you will have to pay for it. Your local NHS wheelchair service may be able to help fund some of the cost. Read more about wheelchairs and mobility scooters. Orthoses are an alternative to wheelchairs. They are braces made of metal or plastic designed to improve the function of a limb and compensate for muscle weakness. Read more about treating paralysis and the complications of paralysis. Paralysis, particularly if it is unexpected, can be a devastating and traumatic experience. Unsurprisingly, many people who are paralysed experience depression. However, research has shown most people with paralysis are eventually able to come to terms with the condition. Video: living with a disability Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Tim, Celia, Kate and Peter share their stories and describe how they found their own way to cope with disability. Media last reviewed: Next review due: How common is paralysis? It is difficult to estimate exactly how widespread paralysis is in England because cases are not recorded in the same way as cancer or heart attacks, for example. A study carried out in the US found 1 in every 50 people had some degree of paralysis. While there may be some difference in the number of cases in England, it is unlikely the figures will be significantly different. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/08\/2014 Next review due: 28\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 121 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 58  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Fitness advice for wheelchair users Information for carers Spastic paraplegia External links Brain and Spine Injury Centre (BASIC) Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation Disabled Living Foundation GOV.UK: Disabled people Spinal Injuries Association Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paraphimosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phimosis","content":"Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phimosis and paraphimosis (tight foreskin) Introduction  Phimosis is a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis (glans). Phimosis is normal in babies and toddlers, but in older children it may be the result of a skin condition that has caused scarring. It isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms. Immediate treatment is needed in cases where phimosis causes problems such as difficulty urinating. Normal development Most uncircumcised baby boys have a foreskin that won't pull back (retract) because it's still attached to the glans. This is perfectly normal for about the first two to six years. By around the age of two, the foreskin should start to separate naturally from the glans. The foreskin of some boys can take longer to separate, but this doesn't mean there's a problem \u2013 it will just detach at a later stage. Never try to force your child's foreskin back before it's ready because it may be painful and damage the foreskin. When phimosis is a problem Phimosis isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms such as redness, soreness or swelling. If your child's glans is sore and inflamed they may have balanitis (inflammation of the head of the penis). There may also be a thick discharge underneath the foreskin. If both the glans and foreskin are inflamed it's known as balanoposthitis. Take your child to see your GP if they have these type of symptoms. Your GP will be able to recommend appropriate treatment. Most cases of balanitis can be easily managed using a combination of good hygiene, creams or ointments, and avoiding substances that irritate the penis. Read more about treating balanitis. Balanoposthitis can also sometimes be treated by following simple hygiene measures, such as keeping the penis clean by regularly washing it with water and a mild soap or moisturiser. Urine can irritate the glans if it's retained for long periods under the foreskin, so if possible you should withdraw the foreskin to wash the glans. If balanoposthitis is caused by a fungal or bacterial infection, an antifungal cream or a course of antibiotics may be needed. In adults, phimosis can occasionally be associated with sexually transmitted infections (STIs). It can also be caused by a number of different skin conditions including: eczema \u2013 a long-term condition that causes the skin to become itchy, red, dry and cracked psoriasis \u2013 a skin condition that causes red, flaky, crusty patches of skin covered with silvery scales lichen planus \u2013 a non-infectious itchy rash that can affect many areas of the body lichen sclerosus \u2013 a scarring condition of the foreskin (and sometimes glans) that's probably caused by urinary irritation in susceptible men and boys Topical steroids (a cream, gel or ointment that contains corticosteroids) are sometimes prescribed to treat a tight foreskin. They can help soften the skin of the foreskin, making it easier to retract. Phimosis can cause pain, skin splitting, or a lack of sensation during sex. Using a condom and lubricants while having sex may make your penis more comfortable. When surgery may be needed Surgery may be needed if a child or adult has severe or persistent balanitis or balanoposthitis that causes their foreskin to be painfully tight. Circumcision (surgically removing part or all of the foreskin) may be considered if other treatments have failed, but it carries risks such as bleeding and infection. Therefore, it's usually only recommended as a last resort, although it can sometimes be the best and only treatment option.  Alternatively, surgery to release the adhesions (areas where the foreskin is stuck to the glans) may be possible. This will preserve the foreskin but may not always prevent the problem recurring. Paraphimosis Paraphimosis is where the foreskin can't be returned to its original position after being retracted. It causes the glans to become painful and swollen and requires emergency medical treatment to avoid serious complications, such as increased pain, swelling and restricted blood flow to the penis. It may be possible to reduce the pain and inflammation by applying a local anaesthetic gel to the penis and pressing on the glans while pushing the foreskin forward. In difficult cases, it may be necessary to make a small slit in the foreskin to help relieve the pressure. In severe cases of paraphimosis, circumcision may be recommended. In very severe cases, a lack of blood flow to the penis can cause tissue death (gangrene) and surgical removal of the penis may be necessary. Penis hygiene It's important to clean your penis regularly to avoid problems developing. You should: gently wash your penis with warm water each day while having a bath or showering gently pull back your foreskin (if you have one) and wash underneath; don't pull back the foreskin of a baby or young boy because it could be painful and cause harm use a mild or non-perfumed soap (if you choose to use soap) to reduce the risk of skin irritation avoid using talc and deodorants on your penis because they may cause irritation Circumcised men should also regularly clean their penis with warm water and a mild soap (if you choose to use soap). Read more about how to wash a penis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2015 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 342 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the sore penis information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/sore_penis_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Circumcision Penis health Why is my penis smelly and sore? External links BAUS: penis procedures BAUS: tight foreskin Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Men's health 18-39 Health for men aged 18 to 39, including eating well, exercise, how to lose the gut and secrets of a sex doctor Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Parkinson's disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Parkinsons-disease","content":"Parkinson's disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Parkinson's disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Parkinsons-disease Real stories Parkinsons-disease Clinical trials Parkinsons-disease Community Parkinson's disease Parkinsons-disease Symptoms Parkinsons-disease Causes Parkinsons-disease Diagnosis Parkinsons-disease Treatment Parkinsons-disease Living with   Parkinson's disease is a condition in which parts of the brain become progressively damaged over many years. The three main symptoms of Parkinson's disease are: involuntary shaking of particular parts of the body (tremor)  slow movement stiff and inflexible muscles A person with Parkinson's disease can also experience a wide range of other physical and psychological symptoms, including: depression and anxiety balance problems \u2013 this may increase the chance of a fall loss of sense of smell (anosmis) problems sleeping (insomnia) memory problems Read more about the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Seeking medical advice See your GP if you're concerned that you may have symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Your GP will ask about the problems you're experiencing and may refer you to a specialist for further tests. Read more about diagnosing Parkinson's disease. Causes of Parkinson's disease Parkinson's disease is caused by a loss of nerve cells in part of the brain called the substantia nigra. This leads to a reduction in a chemical called dopamine in the brain. Dopamine plays a vital role in regulating the movement of the body. A reduction in dopamine is responsible for many of the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Exactly what causes the loss of nerve cells is unclear. Most experts think that a combination of genetic and environmental factors is responsible. Read more about the causes of Parkinson's disease. Who's affected? It's thought around 1 in 500 people are affected by Parkinson's disease, which means there are an estimated 127,000 people in the UK with the condition. Most people with Parkinson's start to develop symptoms when they're over 50, although around 1 in 20 people with the condition first experience symptoms when they're under 40. Men are slightly more likely to get Parkinson's disease than women. Treating Parkinson's disease Although there's currently no cure for Parkinson's disease, treatments are available to help reduce the main symptoms and maintain quality of life for as long as possible. These include: supportive treatments \u2013 such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy medication in some cases, brain surgery You may not need any treatment during the early stages of Parkinson's disease, as symptoms are usually mild. However, you may need regular appointments with your specialist so your condition can be monitored. Read more about treating Parkinson's disease. Outlook As the condition progresses, the symptoms of Parkinson's disease can get worse and it can become increasingly difficult to carry out everyday activities without assistance. Many people respond well to treatment and only experience mild to moderate disability, whereas the minority may not respond as well and can, in time, become more severely disabled. Parkinson's disease doesn't directly cause people to die, but the condition can place great strain on the body, and can make some people more vulnerable to serious and life-threatening infections. However, with advances in treatment, most people with Parkinson's disease now have a normal or near-normal life expectancy. Read more about living with Parkinson's disease. It may also be useful to read your guide to care and support \u2013 written for people with care and support needs, as well as their carers and relatives. It includes information and advice on:  Planning for your future care needs Assessing your care and support needs Parkinson's UK Parkinson's UK is the main Parkinson's support and research charity in the UK. They can help if you're living with the disease and let you know about support groups in your local area. They can be contacted by: free helpline on 0808 800 0303 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 7pm, and 10am to 2pm on Saturdays) email: hello@parkinsons.org.uk The Parkinson's UK website features news, publications, research updates and an online community where you can share your experiences. Page last reviewed: 09\/06\/2016 Next review due: 09\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 524 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 265  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 125  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Parkinson's disease: Karen's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Karen Rose was diagnosed with Parkinson's at just 34 years of age. She talks about the impact it's had on her life over the past 10 years. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Find Parkinson's disease support Living with a long-term condition Neurology and dementia news Your guide to care and support External links Brain and Spine Foundation: Parkinson's disease Healthtalk.org: Parkinson's disease National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): Parkinson's disease Parkinson's UK What social care services are available? Find out about the social care services that can help disabled people and other people who need them Community content from HealthUnlocked Carers' assessments Carers' assessments are the best way to get help and support from your local authority if you look after someone Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer Find and choose services for Parkinson's disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find Parkinson's disease support services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=ParkinsonsDiseaseSupport","content":"Find Parkinson's disease information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Parkinson's disease information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Paronychia (inflamed nail folds)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/nail-abnormalities","content":"Nail abnormalities - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nail abnormalities  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Fingernail or toenail abnormalities can tell you a lot about your health. They're often a sign of a fungal nail infection or injury, but can sometimes indicate a more serious underlying disease. Visit your GP if your nails have changed in colour, texture, shape or thickness and you don't know why (you haven't injured your nails or been biting them). This guide gives the most likely reasons for the following nail problems: brittle or crumbly nails  discoloured nails  white nails  thickened, overgrown nails  loose nails  indented spoon-shaped nails  pitting or dents on the nails  grooves going across the width of the nails  unusually curved fingertips and nails  white lines running across the nails  dark stripes running down the nail  red or brown little streaks under the nails  a destroyed nail  infected nail fold (painful, red and swollen skin next to the nail) Brittle or crumbly nails Brittle nails are often just a sign of ageing or long-term exposure to water or chemicals such as detergents and nail polish. Nails can be strengthened by taking biotin (vitamin B7) supplements, by wearing gloves for all wet work and by frequently applying moisturising cream to the nails. Sometimes, brittle or crumbly nails can be caused by: a fungal nail infection, which can be cleared by taking a course of antifungal tablets (this especially tends to be the cause for crumbly toenails) a skin condition called lichen planus, which can just affect the nails an underactive thyroid or overactive thyroid, where the thyroid gland either doesn't produce enough hormones or produces too many nail psoriasis, a long-term skin condition that can cause the nails to become crumbly A less common cause of crumbly nails is reactive arthritis, an unusual reaction of the immune system affecting the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection. If you have a combination of symptoms affecting different parts of your body, your GP might consider this condition. Discoloured nails The most common causes of a yellow nail are fungal nail infections or nail psoriasis. Yellow nails can also result from any of the following: frequent application of nail varnish lymphoedema, a long-term condition that causes swelling of the skin permanent damage to your airways caused by bronchiectasis (a long-term lung condition) sinusitis (inflammation of the lining of the sinuses) inflammation of the thyroid gland, found in the neck tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection affecting the lungs jaundice (yellowing of the skin) due to liver disease some drugs, such as mepacrine or carotene   chronic paronychia (infection of the nail fold) Green-black nails can be caused by overgrowth of bacteria called pseudomonas, especially under loose nails. This can be treated by applying antibiotic eye drops underneath the nails or soaking the affected nails in an antiseptic solution or vinegar. Grey nails can be caused by medication such as antimalarials or minocycline. Brown nails can sometimes be caused by thyroid disease, pregnancy, malnutrition and frequent use of nail varnish. Red or yellow drop under the nail If the discolouration looks like a drop of oil under the nail plate or is the colour of salmon, you may have psoriasis of the nails. Half white, half brown nails Fingernails that are half white and half brown (brown near the tips) can be a sign of kidney failure, where the kidneys stop working properly. The link is not fully understood, but one theory is that kidney failure causes chemical changes in the blood that encourage melanin (a skin pigment) to be released into the nail bed. It's also possible that kidney failure causes an increase in the number of tiny blood vessels in the nail bed. It's estimated up to 40% of people with kidney failure have \"half-and-half\" fingernails. Half-and-half nails have also been seen in some people with AIDS and can be seen following chemotherapy. White nails If most of the nail plate has turned white and it's not because the nail has become detached from the nail bed, it's likely to be either a fungal nail infection or a sign of decreased blood supply to the nail bed, known as \"Terry's nails\". Terry's nails are typically white with reddened or dark tips and can be a sign of a wide range of medical conditions, including the following: liver cirrhosis (scarring and damage to the liver) \u2013 about 80% of people with cirrhosis have Terry's nails liver, kidney or heart failure diabetes iron-deficiency anaemia \u2013 a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body chemotherapy an overactive thyroid (where the thyroid gland in your neck produces too many hormones) malnutrition  Thickened, overgrown nails A common cause of thickened nails is a fungal nail infection. This can also cause them to discolour and become crumbly (see above). Other possible causes of thickened or overgrown nails are: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin long-term pressure from shoes that are either too small or too narrow over the toes reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection Severely overgrown horn-like nails Sometimes, the big toenails become so overgrown and thickened that they resemble claws and are almost impossible to cut with conventional nail clippers. This nail disorder is known as onychogryphosis (\"ram's horn nails\"), and is seen in older people or as a response to long-term pressure on the nails. Regular chiropody can help, but sometimes the nails need to be removed by a podiatrist or doctor. Loose nails It's normal for a toenail to come loose and fall off after an injury to the toe. However, if you haven't injured your nail, a loose nail is often caused by over-manicuring the nails and cleaning under the nails with a sharp object. Less commonly, it may be a sign of one of the following health conditions: a fungal nail infection psoriasis of the nail \u2013 psoriasis is a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin warts that cluster around the fingernail an overactive thyroid, which means the thyroid gland in the neck is producing too many hormones  sarcoidosis, a condition where small clumps of cells form in the organs and tissues of the body amyloidosis, where protein builds up in the organs a problem with the connective tissue fibres in the body that support the organs and body tissues poor circulation, for example caused by smoking or Raynaud's disease  an allergic reaction to medicine (usually to a type of antibiotic) or nail cosmetics A loose nail should be cut back to where it's detached to allow the nail to become reattached as it grows. You shouldn't clean your nails with anything other than a soft nailbrush. Indented spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) If your fingernails curve inwards like spoons (known medically as koilonychia), you may have one of the following disorders: iron-deficiency anaemia, which is a reduced number of red blood cells due to a lack of iron in the body haemochromatosis, where the body contains too much iron Raynaud\u2019s disease, a common condition affecting the blood supply to the fingers and toes, causing them to turn white  lupus erythematosus, an uncommon condition where the immune system attacks the body's cells, tissues and organs Pitting or dents on the nails Pitting or small dents on the surface of your nails can be a sign of any of the following diseases: psoriasis, a long-term condition that tends to also cause red, flaky patches of skin (10%-50% of patients with psoriasis have pitted nails) eczema, a long-term skin condition reactive arthritis, where the immune system attacks the joints, muscles and other parts of the body following an infection alopecia areata, patches of hair loss that tend to come and go Grooves across the fingernails (Beau's lines) Deep lines or grooves that go from left to right across the nail are known as Beau's lines. They may be a sign of: a previous illness \u2013 the line forms at the time of the illness  chemotherapy a previous injury previous exposure to extremely cold temperatures, if you have Raynaud's disease Illness, injury or cold temperatures can interrupt nail growth and cause nail grooves to form at the base of the nails. These grooves tend to only be noticed a few months later, when the nails have grown and the grooves have moved up the nails to become visible. It takes about four to six months for a fingernail to fully grow out, and 6-12 months for a toenail. Unusually curved fingertips and nails Clubbing of the fingertips means the tissue beneath the nails thickens and the fingertips become rounded and bulbous. The fingernails curve over the rounded fingertips. Clubbing is thought to result from increased blood flow to the fingertips. It can run in families and be entirely harmless. However, if it suddenly develops, it may be a sign of one of many possible medical conditions, including: long-term lung disease or heart disease, such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, or endocarditis inflammatory bowel disease, a long-term disease that causes inflammation of the lining of the gut stomach cancer or bowel cancer cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) polycythaemia, a condition where the blood is too thick  White lines running across nails White spots or streaks are normal and nothing to worry about, but parallel white lines that extend all the way across the nails, known as Muehrcke's lines, are a sign of low levels of protein in the blood. In contrast to Beau's lines (see above), they're not grooved. They can be due to liver disease or malnutrition. Dark stripes running down the nail If you have dark skin, it's fairly common to find dark stripes running down your nails (linear melanonychia). This occurs in more than 77% of black people over the age of 20, and in most cases is perfectly normal. However, it's not something to ignore: dark stripes may sometimes be a form of skin cancer that affects the nail bed, called subungual melanoma. It's important that your doctor checks it to rule out melanoma. Generally, subungual melanoma only affects one nail. Also, it will cause the stripe to change in appearance (for example, it may become wider or darker over time) and the pigmentation may also affect the surrounding skin (the nail fold). Red or brown little streaks under the nails If you have what look like red or brown little streaks underneath the nails, it's likely these are splinter haemorrhages \u2013 lines of blood caused by tiny damaged blood vessels. Just a few splinters under one nail are nothing to worry about and most likely due to injury of the nail. However, if many nails are affected, these splinters may be a sign of lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, an infection of the heart valves (endocarditis) or another underlying disease. A destroyed nail Nails can be destroyed by: injury, including nail biting skin diseases such as psoriasis or lichen planus overgrowth of the surrounding tissues, which is usually harmless (for example, due to a wart or verruca) but can sometimes be cancerous nail patella syndrome \u2013 an uncommon genetic condition which may cause missing nails, usually at birth  If one of your nails becomes destroyed and you don't remember injuring it, it's important to see your GP. Painful, red and swollen nail fold (paronychia) Paronychia is the name for inflammation of the nail fold, which is the skin and soft tissue that frames and supports the nail. This is most often caused by infection, injury or irritation. It's about three times more common in women than in men. Sometimes, there's an underlying skin condition such as eczema or psoriasis or another medical condition such as diabetes or HIV. Paronychia can be acute, where it develops over a few hours, or chronic, where it lasts more than six weeks. Acute paronychia Acute infective paronychia usually starts after a minor injury to the nail fold, such as from nail biting, picking or manicures. The affected area is red, warm, tender and swollen. After a while pus may be seen, which can form around the nail and may lift the nail. Acute paronychia is often caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, although any number of germs can be involved. Treatment is with antibiotic creams or tablets. If there's a large amount of pus, it can help to have this surgically drained. Sometimes, acute paronychia is caused by the cold sore virus, in which case it's known as herpetic whitlow. Acute paronychia can completely clear in a few days with treatment, but if it's not treated or doesn't respond to treatment, it can become long-term (chronic). Chronic paronychia Chronic paronychia may start more gradually and be more difficult to get rid of. It's most common in people who often have their hands in water or chemicals, such as cleaners, bartenders, canteen staff or fishmongers. It may start in one nail fold but can affect several fingers. The affected nail folds are swollen and may be red and sore from time to time, often after exposure to water. The nail plate gradually becomes thickened and ridged as it grows, and may become yellow or green and brittle. The skin in chronic paronychia is often colonised by a mixture of yeasts and bacteria. These germs thrive on previously damaged skin, without necessarily starting the skin damage in the first place. To settle chronic paronychia, both the skin damage and the colonisation with germs needs to be addressed. It can take months for chronic paronychia to clear, and after that up to a year for nails to grow back to normal. You may find that doing things such as keeping your hands dry and warm, frequently using emollient hand cream and avoiding biting and picking your nails can help.  See your GP if the condition is severe. Depending on the type of paronychia, creams and\/or tablets may be prescribed. Use these as directed. You may be referred to a dermatologist for further investigation of the underlying skin disease or for contact allergy testing, and for treatment advice. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1191 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 663  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 277  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the nail abnormalities information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/nail_abnormalities_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Foot health Nail patella syndrome Fungal nail infection Ingrown toenail External links DermNet NZ: pictures of nail disease Getting help from the podiatrist Taking care of your feet is essential. Here's how podiatrists and chiropodists can help Footcare services for older people If you're having trouble with tasks such as cutting your toenails, local footcare services can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Parvovirus B19","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Slapped-cheek-syndrome","content":"Slapped cheek syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Slapped cheek syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Slapped-cheek-syndrome Clinical trials Slapped cheek syndrome   Slapped cheek syndrome (also called fifth disease or parvovirus B19) is a viral infection that's most common in children, although it can affect people of any age. It usually causes a bright red rash on the cheeks. Although the rash can look alarming, slapped cheek syndrome is normally a mild infection that clears up by itself in one to three weeks. Once you've had the infection, you're usually immune to it for life. However, slapped cheek syndrome can be more serious for some people. If you're pregnant, have a blood disorder or a weakened immune system and have been exposed to the virus, you should get medical advice. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice What to do if you or your child has it How you get it Prevention Symptoms of slapped cheek syndrome Symptoms of slapped cheek syndrome usually develop 4-14 days after becoming infected, but sometimes may not appear for up to 21 days. Initial symptoms Some people with slapped cheek syndrome won't notice any early symptoms, but most people will have the following symptoms for a few days: a slightly high temperature (fever) of around 38C (100.4F) a runny nose  a sore throat a headache an upset stomach feeling generally unwell The infection is most contagious during this initial period. In adults, these symptoms are often accompanied by joint pain and stiffness, which may continue for several weeks or even months after the other symptoms have passed. Slapped cheek rash After a few days, a distinctive bright red rash on both cheeks (the so-called \"slapped cheeks\") normally appears, although adults may not get this. By the time this rash develops, the condition is no longer contagious. After another few days, a light pink rash may also appear on the chest, stomach, arms and thighs. This often has a raised, lace-like appearance and may be itchy. The rashes will normally fade within a week or two, although occasionally the body rash may come and go for a few weeks after the infection has passed. This can be triggered by exercise, heat, anxiety or stress. When to get medical advice You don't usually need to see your GP if you think you or your child has slapped cheek syndrome, as the condition normally gets better on its own. However, you should contact your GP, call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service if you have been exposed to anyone with slapped cheek or you have symptoms of the infection and: you're pregnant \u2013 infection in pregnancy, particularly early pregnancy, carries a risk of causing miscarriage, stillbirth or other complications; however, this risk is small and most pregnant women will already be immune (read more about the risks of slapped cheek syndrome in pregnancy) you have a blood disorder, such as sickle cell anaemia or thalassaemia, or a weakened immune system \u2013 the infection can cause severe anaemia that may need to be treated in hospital you have symptoms of severe anaemia, such as very pale skin, severe shortness of breath, extreme tiredness or fainting In these cases, a blood test may be carried out to see if you're immune to the infection. If you're not immune, you'll be monitored carefully to check for any problems. If you develop severe anaemia, it's likely that you'll need to be admitted to hospital and have a blood transfusion to replace your damaged blood cells. What to do if you or your child has slapped cheek Slapped cheek syndrome is usually mild and should clear up without specific treatment. If you or your child is feeling unwell, you can try the following to ease the symptoms: rest and drink plenty of fluids \u2013 babies should continue their normal feeds for a fever, headaches or joint pain, you can take painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen \u2013 children under 16 shouldn't take aspirin to reduce itchiness, you can take antihistamines or use an emollient (moisturising lotion) \u2013 some antihistamines are not suitable for young children, so check with your pharmacist first Unless you or your child is feeling unwell, there\u2019s no need to stay away from school or work once the rash has developed, as the infection is no longer contagious by this point. It's a good idea to notify your child's school about the infection, so children who develop early symptoms can be spotted quickly and vulnerable people can be made aware that they may need to get medical advice. How do you get slapped cheek syndrome? Slapped cheek syndrome is caused by a virus called parvovirus B19. This is found in the droplets in the coughs and sneezes of someone with the infection. The virus is spread in a similar way to colds and flu. You can become infected by:  inhaling droplets that are sneezed or coughed out by someone with the infection touching a contaminated surface or object and then touching your mouth or nose Someone with slapped cheek syndrome is infectious during the period before the rash develops. Once the rash appears, the condition can no longer be passed on. Preventing slapped cheek syndrome It's very difficult to prevent slapped cheek syndrome, because people who have the infection are most contagious before they develop any obvious symptoms. However, making sure that everyone in your household washes their hands frequently may help stop the infection from spreading. There's currently no vaccine available to protect you against the condition. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 13\/10\/2015 Next review due: 13\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 763 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 435  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Slapped cheek syndrome Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Slapped cheek syndrome, also known as fifth disease, is a viral infection that is fairly common in children. Here, a GP talks about the symptoms to look out for. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Childhood illness visual guide Infections in pregnancy Infectious illness in children Is your child seriously ill? Looking after a sick child Infectious illnesses in children Symptoms to look out for if you're concerned your child may have an infectious childhood illness Infections in pregnancy How to protect against infections that might affect your baby, such as CMV, toxoplasmosis and rubella NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Passive smoking","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/smoking\/Pages\/passive-smoking.aspx","content":"Passive smoking - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Passive smoking: protect your family and friends Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Secondhand smoke is dangerous, especially for children. The best way to protect loved ones is to quit smoking. At the very least, make sure you have a smokefree home and car. When you smoke a cigarette (or roll-up, pipe or cigar), most of the smoke doesn't go into your lungs, it goes into the air around you where anyone nearby can breathe it in. Secondhand smoke is the smoke that you exhale plus the 'sidestream' smoke created by the lit end of your cigarette. When friends and family breathe in your secondhand smoke \u2013 what we call passive smoking \u2013 it isn't just unpleasant for them, it can damage their health too. People who breathe in secondhand smoke regularly are more likely to get the same diseases as smokers, including lung cancer and heart disease. Pregnant women exposed to passive smoke are more prone to premature birth and their baby is more at risk of low birthweight and cot death. And children who live in a smoky house are at higher risk of breathing problems, asthma, and allergies. How to protect against secondhand smoke The only surefire way to protect your friends and family from secondhand smoke is to keep the environment around them smoke free. The best way to do that is to quit smoking completely. If you're not ready to quit, make every effort to keep your cigarette smoke away from other people and never smoke indoors or in the car. Always smoke outside Ask your visitors to smoke outside Don't smoke in the car or allow anyone else to Take steps NOW to stop smoking. The risks of passive smoking Secondhand smoke is a lethal cocktail of more than 4,000 irritants, toxins and cancer-causing substances. Most secondhand smoke is invisible and odourless, so no matter how careful you think you're being, people around you still breathe in the harmful poisons. Opening windows and doors or smoking in another room in the house doesn't protect people. Smoke can linger in the air for two to three hours after you've finished a cigarette, even with a window open. And even if you limit smoking to one room, the smoke will spread to the rest of the house where people can inhale it. Is passive smoking harmful? Read about stop smoking treatments. Children and passive smoking Passive smoking is especially harmful for children as they have less well-developed airways, lungs and immune systems. It's estimated that more than one in five children in the UK live in a household where at least one person smokes and, as a result, they're more likely to develop: asthma chest infections \u2013 like pneumonia and bronchitis meningitis ear infections coughs and colds Children are particularly vulnerable in the family car where secondhand smoke can reach hazardous levels even with the windows open. It's estimated that smoking in cars produces concentrations of toxins up to 11 times higher than you used to find in the average smoky pub. To protect children, there is a new ban on smoking in cars and other vehicles carrying children. From October 1 2015 it is against the law to smoke in a private vehicle if there\u2019s a young person under-18 present. Read about the new law on smoking in private vehicles. How safe is e-cig vapour? E-cigarettes don't produce tobacco smoke so the risks of passive smoking with conventional cigarettes don't apply to e-cigs. Research into this area is ongoing, but it seems that e-cigs release negligible amounts of nicotine into the atmosphere and the limited evidence available suggests that any risk from passive vaping to bystanders is small relative to tobacco cigarettes. In England, the Government has no plans to ban vaping indoors (although some employers have banned them in the workplace) but some health professionals recommend avoiding using them around pregnant women, babies and children. Read about the safety of e-cigarettes. Your GP can give you advice about quitting smoking. Page last reviewed: 18\/09\/2015 Next review due: 18\/09\/2017 More articles on: Stop smoking Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 24 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links How NHS Stop Smoking Advisers can help you quit Help to stop smoking in pregnancy Are you at risk of lung cancer? External links Cancer Research UK: passive smoking ASH factsheet: secondhand smoke in the home Royal College of Physicians: passive smoking and children (PDF, 1.05Mb) 'I gave up smoking for my son' Find out the risks of smoking, and read how one woman gave up for her son after 26 years as a smoker Key times to quit smoking Eight key life events that are a great motivation to quit smoking for good 10 health benefits of stopping smoking Quit smoking and you'll be healthier, your skin will look better, and you'll have better sex, too Stop smoking Help with quitting, including what your GP can do, local services and nicotine replacement therapies Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Patau's syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pataus-syndrome","content":"Patau's syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Patau's syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Patau's syndrome is a rare, serious genetic disorder caused by having an additional copy of chromosome 13 in some or all of the body's cells. It's also called trisomy 13. Each cell normally contains 23 pairs of chromosomes, which carry the genes you inherit from your parents.  But a baby with Patau's syndrome has three copies of chromosome 13, instead of two. This severely disrupts normal development and, in many cases, results in miscarriage, stillbirth, or the baby dying shortly after birth. Babies with Patau's syndrome grow slowly in the womb and have a low birth weight, along with a number of other serious medical problems. Patau's syndrome affects about 1 in every 5,000 births. The risk of having a baby with the syndrome increases with the mother's age. More than 9 out of 10 children (over 90%) born with Patau's syndrome die during the first year. About 5-10% of babies with less severe forms of the syndrome, such as partial or mosaic trisomy 13, live for more than a year. This topic covers the following areas: Symptoms and features Causes Screening Treatment and management Genetic testing Further information and support  Symptoms and features Babies with Patau's syndrome can have a wide range of health problems. Their growth in the womb is often restricted, resulting in a low birth weight, and 80% will be born with severe heart defects. The brain often doesn't divide into two halves. This is known as holoprosencephaly. When this happens it can affect facial features and cause defects, such as: cleft lip and palate  an abnormally small eye or eyes (microphthalmia) absence of one or both eyes (anophthalmia) reduced distance between the eyes (hypotelorism) problems with the development of the nasal passages Other abnormalities of the face and head include: smaller than normal head size (microcephaly) skin missing from the scalp (cutis aplasia) ear malformations and deafness raised, red birthmarks (capillary haemangiomas) Patau's syndrome can also cause other problems, such as: an abdominal wall defect where the abdomen doesn't develop fully in the womb, resulting in the intestines being outside the body, covered only by a membrane \u2013 this is known as an exomphalos or omphalocoele abnormal cysts in the kidneys an abnormally small penis in boys  an enlarged clitoris in girls There may also be abnormalities of the hands and feet, such as extra fingers or toes (polydactyly), and a rounded bottom to the feet, known as rocker-bottom feet. Causes of Patau's syndrome Patau's syndrome happens by chance and isn't caused by anything the parents have done. Most cases of the syndrome don't run in families (they're not inherited). They occur randomly during conception, when the sperm and egg combine and the foetus starts to develop. An error occurs when the cells divide, resulting in an additional copy \u2013 or part of a copy \u2013 of chromosome 13, which severely affects the baby's development in the womb. In many cases, the baby dies before reaching full term (miscarriage) or is dead at birth (stillbirth). In most cases of Patau's syndrome (75-90%), a baby has a whole extra copy of chromosome number 13 in their body's cells. This is sometimes known as trisomy 13 or simple trisomy 13. In 5-10% of cases of Patau's syndrome, genetic material is rearranged between chromosome 13 and another chromosome. This is called a chromosomal translocation. Patau's syndrome that arises because of this can be inherited. Genetic Alliance UK has more information about chromosome disorders. In a further 5% of cases, only some cells have the extra copy of chromosome 13. This is known as trisomy 13 mosaicism. Occasionally, only part of one chromosome 13 is extra (partial trisomy 13). The symptoms and features of both mosaicism and partial trisomy tend to be less severe than in simple trisomy 13, resulting in more babies living longer. Screening for Patau's syndrome You'll be offered a screening test for Patau's syndrome \u2013 as well as Down's syndrome (trisomy 21) and Edwards' syndrome (trisomy 18) \u2013 from 10-14 weeks of pregnancy. The test assesses your chances of having a baby with these syndromes. The screening test offered at 10-14 weeks of pregnancy is called the combined test because it involves a blood test and an ultrasound scan. If the screening tests show that you have a higher risk of having a baby with Patau's syndrome, you'll be offered a diagnostic test to find out for certain whether your baby has the syndrome. This test will check your baby's chromosomes in a sample of cells taken from him or her. Two techniques can be used to obtain the cell sample \u2013 amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). These are invasive tests to remove a sample of tissue or fluid so it can be tested for the presence of the extra copy of chromosome 13. A newer test has recently been developed where a sample of blood from the mother is taken so that the baby's DNA found within it can be tested. This is known as non-invasive prenatal testing, and is only available privately. If you're not able to have the combined screening test, you'll be offered a scan that looks for physical abnormalities, including those found in Patau's syndrome. This is sometimes called the mid-pregnancy scan and is carried out when you're between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant. Read more about screening tests in pregnancy. Treating and managing Patau's syndrome There's no specific treatment for Patau's syndrome. As a result of the severe health problems a newborn baby with the syndrome will have, doctors usually focus on minimising discomfort and ensuring the baby is able to feed. For the small number of babies with Patau's syndrome who survive beyond the first few days of life, their care will depend on their specific symptoms and needs. If your baby is diagnosed with Patau's syndrome, either before birth or shortly afterwards, you'll be offered counselling and support. Genetic testing for parents Both parents will need to have their chromosomes analysed if their baby is affected by Patau's syndrome caused by a chromosomal translocation. Genetic testing is carried out to help parents plan for future pregnancies, rather than as part of the decision making process for the current pregnancy. The test results will allow a more accurate assessment to be made of the likelihood of the syndrome affecting future pregnancies. Other family members may also be affected and should be tested. Read more about genetic testing and counselling. Further information and support The organisations listed below are useful further sources of information about Patau's syndrome and can also provide advice and support: Contact a Family  Genetic Alliance UK  Support Organisation for Trisomy 18 and 13 (SOFT UK)    Page last reviewed: 31\/05\/2016 Next review due: 31\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Chorionic villus sampling Coping with stillbirth Genetics Screening in pregnancy External links Babyloss Contact a Family Miscarriage Association Sands: stillbirth and neonatal death charity Support for Trisomy 13\/18 (SOFT UK) Genetics Find out how you inherit your physical and behavioural characteristics, plus learn about testing for genetic conditions Down's syndrome Down's syndrome is a genetic condition that typically causes some level of learning disability and a range of physical features Edwards' syndrome Edwards' syndrome, also known as trisomy 18, is a serious genetic condition that occurs in babies born with three copies of chromosome 18 NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PCOS","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome","content":"Polycystic ovary syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polycystic ovary syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Clinical trials Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Community Polycystic ovary syndrome Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Symptoms Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Causes Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Diagnosis Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Treatment   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common condition that affects how a woman\u2019s ovaries work. The three main features of PCOS are: irregular periods \u2013 which means your ovaries don't regularly release eggs (ovulation) excess androgen \u2013 high levels of \"male hormones\" in your body, which may cause physical signs such as excess facial or body hair (see signs and symptoms below) polycystic ovaries \u2013 your ovaries become enlarged and contain many fluid-filled sacs (follicles) which surround the eggs (it's important to note that, despite the name, if you have PCOS you don't actually have cysts) If you have at least two of these features you may be diagnosed with PCOS. Read more about diagnosing PCOS. Polycystic ovaries Polycystic ovaries contain a large number of harmless follicles that are up to 8mm (approximately 0.3in) in size. The follicles are under-developed sacs in which eggs develop. In PCOS, these sacs are often unable to release an egg, which means that ovulation doesn't take place. It's difficult to know exactly how many women have PCOS, but it's thought to be very common affecting about one in every five women in the UK. More than half of these women don't have any symptoms. Signs and symptoms If you do have signs and symptoms of PCOS, they'll usually become apparent during your late teens or early twenties. They can include: irregular periods or no periods at all difficulty getting pregnant as a result of irregular ovulation or failure to ovulate excessive hair growth (hirsutism) \u2013 usually on the face, chest, back or buttocks weight gain thinning hair and hair loss from the head oily skin or acne   PCOS is also associated with an increased risk of developing health problems in later life, such as type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol levels. What causes PCOS? The exact cause of PCOS is unknown, but it often runs in families. It's related to abnormal hormone levels in the body, including high levels of insulin. Insulin is a hormone that controls sugar levels in the body. Many women with PCOS are resistant to the action of insulin in their body and produce higher levels of insulin to overcome this. This contributes to the increased production and activity of hormones such as testosterone. Being overweight or obese also increases the amount of insulin your body produces. Read more about the causes of PCOS. Treating PCOS There's no cure for PCOS, but the symptoms can be treated. Speak to your GP if you think you may have the condition. If you have PCOS and you're overweight, losing weight and eating a healthy, balanced diet can make some symptoms better. Medications are also available to treat symptoms such as excessive hair growth, irregular periods and fertility problems. If fertility medications are ineffective, a simple surgical procedure called laparoscopic ovarian drilling (LOD) may be recommended. This involves using heat or a laser to destroy the tissue in the ovaries that's producing androgens, such as testosterone. With treatment, most women with PCOS are able to get pregnant. Read more about treating PCOS. Page last reviewed: 18\/03\/2016 Next review due: 18\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 595 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 299  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Absent periods Acne Fertility Hirsutism Irregular periods Lose weight Ovarian cyst External links Lab Tests Online UK: LH test PCOS UK Verity: PCOS charity Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Fertility Find out about the treatments and support available if you have fertility problems Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Polycystic ovary syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PDT (photodynamic therapy)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy","content":"Photodynamic therapy (PDT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Photodynamic therapy (PDT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy Clinical trials Photodynamic therapy photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy Next-generation PDT and sonodynamic therapy Introduction  Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a treatment that involves the use of a light-sensitive medication and a light source to destroy abnormal cells. It can be used to treat some skin and eye conditions, as well as certain types of cancer. On their own, the medication and light source are harmless, but when the medication is exposed to the light, it activates and causes a reaction that damages nearby cells. This allows small abnormal areas of tissue to be treated without the need for surgery. Uses of PDT PDT can be used to treat abnormalities in parts of the body a light source can most easily reach, such as the skin, eyes, mouth, oesophagus (gullet) and lungs. Conditions sometimes treated with PDT include: actinic keratoses \u2013 dry scaly patches of skin caused by damage from years of sun exposure that could become cancerous if not treated Bowen's disease \u2013 a very early form of skin cancer basal cell carcinoma \u2013 a type of skin cancer macular degeneration \u2013 an eye condition that can lead to vision loss Barrett's oesophagus \u2013 changes in the cells in the lining of your lower oesophagus that could become cancerous if not treated oesophageal cancer, mouth cancer and lung cancer \u2013 PDT can cure some cancers if used in the early stages, or offer relief from symptoms in more advanced cases PDT also shows promise in treating some other types of cancer, as well as conditions such as warts and acne. Despite the claims relating to unproven \u201Calternative\u201D forms of PDT, such as next-generation PDT and sonodynamic therapy, PDT is not effective at treating widespread conditions or those affecting deeper parts of the body where a light source cannot reach. In these cases, surgery, radiotherapy, and\/or chemotherapy may be recommended instead. What happens PDT is carried out in two stages. First, you will need to come into the hospital or clinic to be given the light-sensitive medication. Depending on the area of the body being treated, this can be a cream, injection or special drink. Once the medication has been applied or given, you may be asked to go home and return in a few hours or days. This will give the medication a chance to build-up in the abnormal or cancerous cells that are going to be treated. Later, you will need to return to the hospital or clinic for the light treatment. This will involve a lamp or laser being shone onto the treatment area for around 10-45 minutes. To treat abnormal cells inside your body, such as in your lungs, an endoscope (flexible tube) will be passed into your body to deliver the light. After treatment You will usually be able to go home the same day you have the light treatment. If your skin was treated, it will be covered by a dressing that will need to remain in place for at least two days. You should try to avoid scratching or knocking the treated area, and keep it as dry as possible. Once you are advised to remove the dressing, you should be able to wash and bathe as normal, although you should make sure you pat the treated area dry gently. A follow-up appointment at the hospital or clinic will be arranged to assess whether the treatment has been effective and decide if it needs to be repeated. It will usually take around two to six weeks for the area to heal completely. Risks and side effects PDT is generally a very safe treatment. However, it\u2019s common to experience a burning or stinging sensation while the light treatment is being carried out. This will usually pass soon after the treatment finishes. PDT can also make your skin or eyes sensitive to light for up to six weeks, even if the area treated was inside your body. This means they may become red and sore when exposed to direct sunlight or bright indoor lights. Your treatment team will advise you about things you should do to protect your eyes and skin. Other potential side effects will depend on the area treated. For example, if your skin is treated, it may crust over, and become temporarily red, swollen or blistered after treatment. Your skin may also become slightly darker or lighter than it was before and there may be some hair loss. This is usually temporary, but it can sometimes be permanent. Treatment of the mouth, oesophagus and lungs can cause temporary coughing, difficulty swallowing, painful breathing, or breathlessness. If your eyes are treated, there is a small risk of permanent vision loss. Make sure you talk to your doctors about the possible risks and benefits of PDT before you agree to treatment. Next-generation PDT (NGPDT) and sonodynamic therapy (SDT) PDT as described above is an effective and licensed treatment for a number of conditions. It should not be confused with the unproven, unlicensed versions sold by some private clinics in the UK and overseas. Clinics promoting these so-called \"advanced\" versions of PDT, called \"next-generation PDT\" (NGPDT) and \"sonodynamic therapy\" (SDT) claim they can treat deep or widespread cancers, but these claims aren't supported by scientific evidence and these treatments aren't recommended. Read more about NGPDT and SDT. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2014 Next review due: 16\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Living with cancer Risks of treatment abroad Healthy skin Find cancer information and support External links British Medical Laser Association: NGPDT and SDT Action for Sick Children Cancer Research UK: PDT Macmillan Cancer Support: PDT Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer The risks of treatment abroad There are many issues to consider before having surgery or dental treatment abroad NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peak flow test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/peak-flow","content":"Peak flow test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Peak flow test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview peak-flow Clinical trials peak-flow Community Peak flow test   Peak flow is a simple measurement of how quickly you can blow air out of your lungs. It's often used to help diagnose and monitor asthma. A peak flow test involves blowing as hard as you can into a small, hand-held device called a peak flow meter. These are available on prescription or can be bought from most pharmacies. This page covers: Why peak flow is measured How to measure your peak flow Your peak flow score What to do if you peak flow is low Why peak flow is measured By measuring how fast you're able to breathe out, your peak flow score can indicate whether your airways are narrowed. This could be a sign that you have asthma, although other tests such as spirometry will often be needed to confirm the diagnosis. If you've already been diagnosed with asthma, measuring your peak flow regularly can be a useful way of monitoring your condition. Your score can show whether or not your condition is getting worse. It can also check if your medication is working, and indicate whether you're having an asthma attack. Measuring your peak flow before and after exposure to a possible asthma trigger, such as something you're allergic to or a substance you're exposed to at work, may also show if anything in particular causes your symptoms. How to measure your peak flow The first time your peak flow is measured, you'll be taught how to do it by a doctor or nurse. Thereafter, they may advise you to carry out the test regularly at home using your own peak flow meter. To measure your peak flow: find a comfortable position, either sitting or standing ensure the meter is set to \"0\", your fingers are not obstructing the measurement scale, and the meter is held horizontally breathe in as deeply as you can and place your lips tightly around the mouthpiece breathe out as quickly and as hard as you can when you've finished breathing out, make a note of your reading This should be repeated three times, and the highest of the three measurements should be recorded as your peak flow score. If you're monitoring your asthma at home, you may have a diary or chart to record your score. You can download a peak flow diary (PDF, 2.2Mb) from the Asthma UK website if you don't have one. Your peak flow score Your peak flow score \u2013 also known as your peak expiratory flow (PEF) \u2013 will be displayed on the side of your peak flow meter. This is given in litres of air breathed out per minute (l\/min). What's considered a normal score depends on your age, height and gender. To help diagnose asthma, your result can be compared to what would usually be expected for someone of your age, height and gender. A significant difference between your score and a normal score, or a difference in your scores in the morning and evening or when your symptoms are good and bad, may suggest you have asthma. If you're monitoring your asthma at home, your score should be compared to your best result at a point when your condition was well controlled. A big difference between your current and best score could be a sign that your condition is becoming poorly controlled or that you're having an asthma attack. What to do if your peak flow is low If you have a personal asthma action plan, it might say what you should do when your peak flow score falls to a certain level. You may just need to use one of your inhalers, or you may need to seek medical help. See treating asthma and what to do if you have an asthma attack for more information. Speak to your GP or asthma nurse if you've been diagnosed with asthma and don't have a personal action plan, or if you're concerned about your peak flow score and don't know what to do. You can download a personal action plan (PDF, 681kb) that you can fill in with your doctor or nurse from the Asthma UK website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 21\/08\/2015 Next review due: 21\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 48 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Asthma Living with asthma Spirometry External links Asthma UK: peak flow diary British Lung Foundation: asthma Do I have asthma? Many asthma symptoms are similar to those for other conditions, so it's vital to see a GP to get a correct diagnosis Asthma: lifestyle tips Ways to keep your asthma symptoms at bay without giving up all the things in life that you enjoy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pelvic inflammatory disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pelvic-inflammatory-disease","content":"Pelvic inflammatory disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic inflammatory disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Clinical trials Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Community Pelvic inflammatory disease Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Causes Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Diagnosis Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Treatment Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Complications Introduction  Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the female upper genital tract, including the womb, fallopian tubes and ovaries. PID is a common condition, although it's not clear how many women are affected in the UK. It mostly affects sexually active women aged 15 to 24. Symptoms PID often doesn't cause any obvious symptoms. Most women have mild symptoms that may include one or more of the following: pain around the pelvis or lower abdomen (tummy) discomfort or pain during sex that's felt deep inside the pelvis pain during urination bleeding between periods and after sex heavy periods painful periods  unusual vaginal discharge, especially if it's yellow or green A few women become very ill with: severe lower abdominal pain a high temperature (fever) nausea and vomiting When to seek medical advice It\u2019s important to visit your GP or a sexual health clinic if you experience any of the above symptoms. If you have severe pain, you should seek urgent medical attention from your GP or local A&E department. Delaying treatment for PID or having repeated episodes of PID can increase your risk of serious and long-term complications (see below). There's no simple test to diagnose PID. Diagnosis is based on your symptoms and the finding of tenderness on a vaginal (internal) examination. Swabs will be taken from your vagina and cervix (neck of the womb), but negative swabs don't rule out PID. Read more about diagnosing PID. Causes Most cases of PID are caused by a bacterial infection that's spread from the vagina or the cervix to the reproductive organs higher up. Many different types of bacteria can cause PID. In about one in four cases, it's caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as chlamydia or gonorrhoea. In many other cases, it's caused by bacteria that normally live in the vagina. Read more about the causes of PID. Treatment If diagnosed at an early stage, PID can be treated with a course of antibiotics, which usually lasts for 14 days. You'll be given a mixture of antibiotics to cover the most likely infections, and often an injection as well as tablets. It's important to complete the whole course and avoid having sexual intercourse during this time to help ensure the infection clears. Your recent sexual partners also need to be tested and treated to stop the infection recurring or being spread to others. Read more about treating PID. Complications The fallopian tubes can become scarred and narrowed if they're affected by PID. This can make it difficult for eggs to pass from the ovaries into the womb. This can increase your chances of having an ectopic pregnancy (a pregnancy in the fallopian tubes instead of the womb) in the future and can make some women infertile. It's estimated that around 1 in 10 women with PID becomes infertile as a result of the condition. Women who have had delayed treatment or had repeated episodes of PID are most at risk. However, most women treated for PID are still able to get pregnant without any problems. Read more about the complications of PID. Prevention You can reduce your risk of PID by always using condoms with a new sexual partner until they've had a sexual health check. Chlamydia is very common in young men, and most don't have any symptoms. If you're worried you may have an STI, visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) or sexual health clinic for advice. Find your local sexual health clinic. If you need an invasive gynaecological procedure, such as insertion of a coil or an abortion, have a check-up beforehand. Read more advice about STIs.  Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2015 Next review due: 03\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 219 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Infertility Sexual health External links BASHH: PID (PDF, 385kb) FPA: chlamydia Contraception guide All you need to know about contraception, how it works and where to get it Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose sexual health services Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pelvic organ prolapse","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pelvic pain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pelvic-pain","content":"Pelvic pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pelvic-pain Community Pelvic pain Introduction  Pelvic pain is felt below your bellybutton. It may come on suddenly and severely, or could be mild and last for months. See your GP as soon as possible if you're experiencing pelvic pain. In some cases, women may be referred to a gynaecologist (a specialist in the female reproductive system). Sometimes the cause of pelvic pain can't be identified. The following information is about pelvic pain in women, as men are rarely affected. It covers the possible causes of: sudden, unexpected (acute) pelvic pain  persistent or recurrent (chronic) pelvic pain The information and advice below aims to give you a better idea of the cause of your pelvic pain, but you shouldn't use it to self-diagnose your condition. Always see your GP to get their medical opinion. For information and advice about pelvic or abdominal pain during pregnancy, see our pages on pelvic pain in pregnancy, ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage. Sudden, unexpected pelvic pain Pelvic pain that comes on suddenly for the first time is called acute pelvic pain. See your GP immediately if you have acute pelvic pain. They'll be able to investigate the cause and arrange any necessary treatment. Common causes of acute pelvic pain The most common causes of acute pelvic pain in women who aren't pregnant are: an ovarian cyst \u2013 a fluid-filled sac that develops on an ovary and causes pelvic pain when it bursts or becomes twisted acute pelvic inflammatory disease \u2013 a bacterial infection of the womb, fallopian tubes or ovaries, which often follows a chlamydia or gonorrhoea infection and needs immediate treatment with antibiotics appendicitis \u2013 a painful swelling of the appendix (a finger-like pouch connected to the large intestine) which usually causes pain on the lower right-hand side of your abdomen (tummy) peritonitis \u2013 inflammation of the peritoneum (the thin layer of tissue that lines the inside of the abdomen); it causes sudden abdominal pain that gradually becomes more severe and requires immediate medical treatment a urinary tract infection \u2013 you'll probably also have pain or a burning sensation when you urinate, and you may need to urinate more often constipation or bowel spasm \u2013 this may be brought on by changes in diet, medication, irritable bowel syndrome or, in rare cases, a bowel obstruction Less common reasons for acute pelvic pain Less common causes of acute pelvic pain include: a pelvic abscess \u2013 a collection of pus between the womb and vagina that needs urgent treatment in hospital  endometriosis \u2013 a long-term condition where small pieces of womb lining are found outside the womb, such as on the ovaries, leading to painful periods Persistent or recurrent pelvic pain If you've had pelvic pain for six months or more that either comes and goes or is continuous, it's known as chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain is more intense than ordinary period pain and lasts longer. It affects around one in six women. See your GP if you have chronic pelvic pain. They'll investigate the cause and arrange any necessary treatment. Common causes of chronic pelvic pain The most common causes of chronic pelvic pain are: endometriosis chronic pelvic inflammatory disease \u2013 a bacterial infection of the womb, fallopian tubes or ovaries, which often follows a chlamydia or gonorrhoea infection and needs immediate treatment with antibiotics irritable bowel syndrome \u2013 a common, long-term condition of the digestive system that can cause stomach cramps, bloating, diarrhoea and constipation Less common reasons for chronic pelvic pain Less common causes of chronic pelvic pain include: recurrent ovarian cysts \u2013 fluid or blood-filled sacs that develop on the ovaries    a recurrent urinary tract infection lower back pain prolapse of the womb \u2013 where the womb slips down from its normal position and usually causes a \"dragging\" pain adenomyosis \u2013 endometriosis that affects the muscle of the womb, causing painful, heavy periods fibroids \u2013 non-cancerous tumours that grow in or around the womb; fibroids can be painful if they twist or deteriorate, but uncomplicated fibroids aren't usually painful  chronic interstitial cystitis \u2013 long-term inflammation of the bladder inflammatory bowel disease \u2013 a term used to describe two chronic conditions, ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, which affect the gut a hernia \u2013 where an internal part of the body pushes through a weakness in the surrounding muscle or tissue wall trapped or damaged nerves in the pelvic area \u2013 these may cause sharp, stabbing or aching pain in a specific area, which often gets worse with certain movements Page last reviewed: 25\/01\/2016 Next review due: 25\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 176 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ovarian cyst Urinary tract infection Pelvic inflammatory disease External links Pelvic Pain Support Network Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have 10 surefire ways to beat pain Practical ways to beat pain, including relaxation tips, breathing exercises and self management courses Pelvic pain in pregnancy How to cope with pelvic pain in pregnancy, and tips on managing the condition Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pemphigus vulgaris","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pemphigus-vulgaris","content":"Pemphigus vulgaris - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pemphigus vulgaris  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pemphigus-vulgaris Real stories Pemphigus-vulgaris Clinical trials Pemphigus-vulgaris Community Pemphigus vulgaris Pemphigus-vulgaris Treatment Introduction  Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a rare and serious condition that causes painful blisters to develop on the skin and lining of the mouth, nose, throat and genitals. The blisters are fragile and can easily burst open, leaving areas of raw unhealed skin that are very painful and can put you at risk of infections. There's currently no cure for pemphigus vulgaris, but treatment can help keep the symptoms under control. The condition can affect people of all ages, including children, but most cases develop in older adults between the ages of 50 and 60. It isn't contagious and can't be passed from one person to another. Symptoms of pemphigus vulgaris The blisters usually develop in the mouth first, before affecting the skin a few weeks or months later. There tends to be times when the blisters are severe (flare-ups), followed by periods when they heal and fade (remission). It's impossible to predict when this might happen and how severe the flare-ups will be. Blisters in the mouth often turn into painful sores, which can make eating, drinking and brushing teeth very difficult. The voice can become hoarse if they spread to the voice box (larynx). Sores on the skin can join together to form large areas of painful, raw-looking skin, before crusting over and forming scabs. They don't usually leave any scars, although affected skin can occasionally become permanently discoloured. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you have severe or persistent blisters or sores in your mouth or on your skin. It's unlikely that you have pemphigus vulgaris, but it's a good idea to get your symptoms checked out. If your GP thinks your symptoms could be caused by a serious condition such as pemphigus vulgaris, they can refer you to a dermatologist (skin specialist) for some tests. The dermatologist will examine your skin and mouth, and may remove a small sample (biopsy) from the affected area so it can be analysed in a laboratory. This can confirm whether you have pemphigus vulgaris. What causes pemphigus vulgaris? Pemphigus vulgaris is what's known as an autoimmune condition. This means that something goes wrong with the immune system (the body's defence against infection) and it starts attacking healthy tissue. In cases of pemphigus vulgaris, the immune system attacks cells found in a deep layer of skin, as well as cells found in the mucous membrane (the protective lining of the mouth, nostrils, throat, genitals and anus). This causes blisters to form in the affected tissue. It is unclear what causes the immune system to go wrong in this way. Certain genes have been linked to an increased risk of pemphigus vulgaris, although it doesn't tend to run in families. Treatments for pemphigus vulgaris The symptoms of pemphigus vulgaris can often be controlled with a combination of medicines that help stop the immune system attacking the body. Most people will start off taking high doses of steroid medication (corticosteroids) for a few weeks or months. This helps stop new blisters forming and allows existing ones to heal. To reduce the risk of side effects from steroid medication, the dose is then gradually reduced and another medication that reduces the activity of the immune system is taken alongside it. It may eventually be possible to stop taking medications for pemphigus vulgaris if the symptoms don't come back, although many people need ongoing treatment to prevent flare-ups. Read more about treating pemphigus vulgaris. Risk of infected blisters There is a high risk of blisters caused by pemphigus vulgaris becoming infected, so it's important to look out for signs of infection. Signs of an infected blister can include: the skin becoming painful and hot yellow or green pus in the blisters red streaks leading away from the blisters Don't ignore these signs, as an infected blister could potentially lead to a very serious infection if left untreated. Contact your GP or dermatologist for advice straight away. Help and support Being told you have a rare, serious disease can be a bewildering, frightening and sometimes lonely experience. It can help to find out as much as you can about the condition and how best to cope with it. A good place to start is the Pemphigus Vulgaris Network, a UK support group for people with pemphigus vulgaris. NHS support is also available to help you deal with the physical and emotional effects of living with long-term pain. Read more about living with pain. Page last reviewed: 17\/12\/2015 Next review due: 17\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blisters Healthy skin Living with pain Steroid medication External links British Association of Dermatologists: pemphigus vulgaris (PDF, 474kb) PEM Friends Pemphigus Vulgaris Network Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Penicillin","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Antibiotics-penicillins","content":"Antibiotics - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Antibiotics  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Antibiotics-penicillins Clinical trials Antibiotics Antibiotics-penicillins Uses Antibiotics-penicillins Considerations Antibiotics-penicillins Side effects Antibiotics-penicillins Interactions   Antibiotics are used to treat or prevent some types of bacterial infection. They work by killing bacteria or preventing them from reproducing and spreading. Antibiotics aren't effective against viral infections, such as the common cold, flu, most coughs and sore throats. Many mild bacterial infections can also be cleared by your immune system without using antibiotics, so they aren't routinely prescribed. It's important that antibiotics are prescribed and taken correctly to help prevent the progression of antibiotic resistance. This is when a strain of bacteria no longer responds to treatment with one or more types of antibiotics. When antibiotics are used Antibiotics may be used to treat bacterial infections that: are unlikely to clear up without antibiotics could infect others unless treated could take too long to clear without treatment carry a risk of more serious complications People at a high risk of infection may also be given antibiotics as a precaution, known as antibiotic prophylaxis. Read more about when antibiotics are used. How do I take antibiotics? Take antibiotics as directed on the packet or the patient information leaflet that comes with the medication, or as instructed by your GP or pharmacist. Doses of antibiotics can be provided in several ways: oral antibiotics \u2013 tablets, capsules or a liquid that you drink, which can be used to treat most types of mild to moderate infections in the body topical antibiotics \u2013 creams, lotions, sprays or drops, which are often used to treat skin infections injections of antibiotics \u2013 these can be given as an injection or infusion through a drip directly into the blood or muscle, and are usually reserved for more serious infections It's essential to finish taking a prescribed course of antibiotics, even if you feel better, unless a healthcare professional tells you otherwise. If you stop taking an antibiotic part way through a course, the bacteria can become resistant to the antibiotic. Missing a dose of antibiotics If you forget to take a dose of your antibiotics, take that dose as soon as you remember and then continue to take your course of antibiotics as normal. But if it's almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Don't take a double dose to make up for a missed one. There's an increased risk of side effects if you take two doses closer together than recommended. Accidentally taking an extra dose Accidentally taking one extra dose of your antibiotic is unlikely to cause you any serious harm. But it will increase your chances of experiencing side effects, such as pain in your stomach, diarrhoea, and feeling or being sick. If you accidentally take more than one extra dose of your antibiotic, are worried or experiencing severe side effects, speak to your GP or call NHS 111 as soon as possible. Side effects of antibiotics As with any medication, antibiotics can cause side effects. Most antibiotics don't cause problems if they're used properly and serious side effects are rare. The most common side effects include: being sick feeling sick bloating and indigestion diarrhoea Some people may have an allergic reaction to antibiotics, especially penicillin and a type called cephalosporins. In very rare cases, this can lead to a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), which is a medical emergency. Read more about the side effects of antibiotics. Considerations and interactions Some antibiotics aren't suitable for people with certain medical conditions, or women who are pregnant or breastfeeding. You should only ever take antibiotics prescribed for you \u2013 never \"borrow\" them from a friend or family member. Some antibiotics can also react unpredictably with other medications, such as the oral contraceptive pill and alcohol. It's important to read the information leaflet that comes with your medication carefully and discuss any concerns with your pharmacist or GP. Read more about: things to consider before taking antibiotics how antibiotics interact with other medicines Types of antibiotics There are hundreds of different types of antibiotics, but most of them can be broadly classified into six groups. These are outlined below. penicillins (such as penicillin and amoxicillin) \u2013 widely used to treat a variety of infections, including skin infections, chest infections and urinary tract infections cephalosporins (such as cephalexin) \u2013 used to treat a wide range of infections, but some are also effective for treating more serious infections, such as septicaemia and meningitis aminoglycosides (such as gentamicin and tobramycin) \u2013 tend to only be used in hospital to treat very serious illnesses such as septicaemia, as they can cause serious side effects, including hearing loss and kidney damage; they're usually given by injection, but may be given as drops for some ear or eye infections tetracyclines (such as tetracycline and doxycycline)\u2013 can be used to treat a wide range of infections, but are commonly used to treat moderate to severe acne and rosacea macrolides (such as erythromycin and clarithromycin) \u2013 can be particularly useful for treating lung and chest infections, or an alternative for people with a penicillin allergy, or to treat penicillin-resistant strains of bacteria fluoroquinolones (such as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) \u2013 broad-spectrum antibiotics that can be used to treat a wide range of infections Antibiotic resistance Both the NHS and health organisations across the world are trying to reduce the use of antibiotics, especially for conditions that aren't serious. The overuse of antibiotics in recent years means they're becoming less effective and has led to the emergence of \"superbugs\". These are strains of bacteria that have developed resistance to many different types of antibiotics, including: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)  Clostridium difficile (C. diff) the bacteria that cause multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) These types of infections can be serious and challenging to treat, and are becoming an increasing cause of disability and death across the world. The biggest worry is that new strains of bacteria may emerge that can't be effectively treated by any existing antibiotics. Read about how you can help prevent the progression of antibiotic resistance. Page last reviewed: 09\/06\/2016 Next review due: 09\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1124 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 498  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 212  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 98  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 267  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Treating your infection without antibiotics Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Antibiotics don't work for many colds, coughs, flu or sore throats. This video outlines other treatments that can be more effective. Media last reviewed: 09\/11\/2015 Next review due: 09\/11\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links The Antibiotic Awareness Campaign Medication news Pharmacy and medicines External links Yellow Card Scheme Making sense of your medicines Find out about taking prescription medicines and what to discuss with your doctor. Plus, a pharmacist answers common questions Antibiotic resistance The Chief Medical Officer for England has warned about the growing threat of antibiotic resistance NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Penile cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Penile-cancer","content":"Penile cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Penile cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Penile-cancer Clinical trials Penile cancer Introduction  Penile cancer is a rare type of cancer that occurs on the skin of the penis or within the penis. In the UK, around 550 men are diagnosed with cancer of the penis each year. It most commonly affects men over 60 years of age. Over the last 30 years, the number of penile cancer cases has increased by more than 20%, possibly due to changes in sexual practices. However, improvements in diagnosis, staging and treatment have led to a similar reduction in the number of deaths resulting from the condition. Signs and symptoms You should be aware of any abnormalities or signs of penile cancer, including: a growth or sore on the penis that doesn't heal within four weeks  bleeding from the penis or from under the foreskin a foul smelling discharge thickening of the skin of the penis or foreskin that makes it difficult to draw back the foreskin (phimosis) a change in the colour of the skin of the penis or foreskin a rash on the penis If you experience these symptoms, it's important that they're checked by your GP as soon as possible. It's unlikely they'll be caused by cancer of the penis, but they need to be investigated. Any delay in diagnosing penile cancer could reduce the chances of successful treatment. Types of penile cancer The penis is made up of many different types of tissue. The type of penile cancer you have will depend on the type of cell the cancer developed from. The most common types of penile cancer include: squamous cell penile cancer \u2013 which accounts for more than 90% of cases and starts in the cells that cover the surface of the penis carcinoma in situ (CIS) \u2013 a particular type of squamous cell cancer where only the cells in the skin of the penis are affected and it hasn't spread any deeper adenocarcinoma \u2013 cancer that starts in the glandular cells of the penis that produce sweat melanoma of the penis \u2013 where the cancer develops in the skin cells that give the skin its colour The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the different types of penile cancer. What causes penile cancer? The cause of penile cancer isn't known, but certain risk factors can increase your chances of getting it. Men who carry the human papilloma virus (HPV) have an increased risk of developing penile cancer, which is the virus that causes genital warts. Studies have found that almost 5 out of 10 men (47%) with penile cancer also have an HPV infection. Age is also a risk factor for cancer of the penis. The condition rarely affects men under 40 years of age, and most commonly occurs in men aged over 60. Smoking is the most significant lifestyle factor associated with penile cancer. Chemicals found in cigarettes can damage cells in the penis, which increases your risk of getting the condition.   Conditions that affect the penis, such as phimosis, which makes the foreskin difficult to retract, increase your chances of developing infections such as balanitis. Repeated infections are linked to a higher risk of developing some types of penile cancer, because they can weaken your immune system. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about the risks and causes of penile cancer. Diagnosing penile cancer Your GP will ask you about any symptoms you have and when they occur. They'll also examine your penis for signs of penile cancer. In 2015, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) published guidelines to help GPs recognise the signs and symptoms of penile cancer and refer people for the right tests faster. To find out if you should be referred for further tests for suspected penile cancer, read the NICE 2015 guidelines on Suspected Cancer: Recognition and Referral. If your GP suspects penile cancer, they may refer you to a specialist \u2013 usually a urologist (a doctor who specialises in conditions that affect the urinary system and genitals). The specialist will ask about your symptoms and check your medical history. They may also check for any physical signs of penile cancer. A blood test may be carried out to check your general health and the number of blood cells. To confirm a diagnosis of penile cancer, you may need to have a biopsy. A small tissue sample will be removed so it can be examined under a microscope for cancerous cells. Treating penile cancer  Treatment for penile cancer will depend on the size of the affected area and the rate at which the cancer has spread. For example, in most cases of carcinoma in situ (CIS), where only the skin cells of the penis are affected, treatment will usually involve either using a chemotherapy cream or having laser surgery to remove the affected area of skin. You will usually have a skin graft after surgery. The main treatments for penile cancer that isn't at a very early stage are: surgery radiotherapy chemotherapy Surgery will involve removing the cancerous cells and possibly some of the surrounding tissue. In most cases, any physical changes to your penis after an operation can be corrected with reconstructive surgery. Skin and muscle can be taken from elsewhere in the body to recreate a functioning penis. However, with early diagnosis and modern surgical techniques, your surgeon will usually be able to preserve as much penile tissue as possible. As part of most treatments for penile cancer, the lymph glands (small organs that are part of the immune system) in the groin will be assessed to determine if the cancer has spread. The test that's used, known as a sentinel node biopsy, is widely available in the UK. In some cases, the lymph glands may need to be surgically removed. As with most types of cancer, the outlook for individual cases depends largely on how far the cancer has advanced at the time of diagnosis. The Cancer Research UK website has more information about staging penile cancer and the types of treatment for cancer of the penis. You can also read about penile cancer on the male cancer website Orchid. They also have a helpline you can call \u2013 0203 465 5766 (Monday to Friday, 9am-5.30pm). Prevention It isn't always possible to prevent penile cancer, but you can reduce your chances of getting it. One of the main ways you can reduce your chances of developing penile cancer is to give up smoking (if you smoke). It's also important to maintain good penis hygiene to prevent the bacterial and viral infections that can increase the risk of penile cancer. This is easier if you were circumcised as a child, but there are steps you can take if you haven't been circumcised. Simple penis hygiene can include: using condoms to help reduce the possibility of catching HPV regularly washing your penis with warm water, including under the foreskin There's little evidence to suggest that being circumcised as an adult will reduce your chances of developing penile cancer. However, if you have sores that don't heal, or if it's becoming increasingly difficult to clean under your foreskin, seek advice from your GP about the possibility of circumcision. Read more about penis health. One for the Boys: an introduction Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. One for the Boys is a male cancer awareness campaign. In this video Samuel L. Jackson, actor and chairman of the campaign, describes why it is important to raise awareness and talk about cancer. One for the Boys arms men with the facts and the tools they need to tackle cancer head on. Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 What is cancer? The body is made up of millions of different types of cells. Cancer occurs when some of the cells grow and multiply in an abnormal way. When cancer affects organs and solid tissues, it causes a growth called a tumour to form. Cancer can occur in any part of the body where the cells multiply abnormally. Community content from HealthUnlocked Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Page last reviewed: 11\/09\/2014 Next review due: 11\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 80 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Find cancer support services Living with cancer Penis health Phimosis (tight foreskin) External links Cancer Research UK: penile cancer Macmillan Cancer Support: penile cancer Orchid: fighting male cancer Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Phimosis Find out about phimosis, a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis Stop smoking Help with quitting, including what your GP can do, local services and nicotine replacement therapies NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Penis health","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/penis-health\/Pages\/penis-health.aspx","content":"Penis health - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Penis health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Penis health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Penis size Many men worry that their penis isn\u2019t as big as it should be, but research suggests most men underestimate the size of their tackle. Penis enlargement We look at the wild claims and potential harms of the different penis enlargement treatments on the market. Five penis facts How well do you really know your penis? Find out the five penis facts that every man should know Is my penis the right size and shape? Find out the average shape and size of a penis and what to do if you're worried. How to keep a penis clean Find out how to keep your penis and testicles clean, healthy and fit for purpose. The testicles Find out what testicles should look and feel like and how to spot problems. Masturbation Q&A Is masturbation normal, and is it possible to masturbate too much? We sort fact from myth to answer your questions. Is it normal to have a curved penis? Learn about the symptoms, causes and treatments for Peyronie\u2019s disease. Male sexual problems Summary of male sexual problems, such as not being able to get or keep and erection, and premature ejaculation. Links to in-depth information. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the sore penis information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/sore_penis_a_visual_guide.html Also on NHS Choices Balanitis Tight foreskin (phimosis) Why is my penis smelly and sore? Is it normal to have a bent or curved penis (Peyronie's disease)? Want to find out how healthy you are? Take our quiz to see how you score Community content from HealthUnlocked Video: teen bodies Find out about the changes that happen to boys\u2019 and girls\u2019 bodies during puberty. Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Boys and puberty Q&A What to expect as you grow up, including erections, feelings, wet dreams, spots and more Sex and young people Answers to sex FAQs, including saying no, what to do if a condom splits, being gay and more What happens at an STI clinic What to expect at an STI clinic, including tests, treatment, and the questions you may be asked Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peptic ulcer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Peptic-ulcer","content":"Stomach ulcer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stomach ulcer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Peptic-ulcer Clinical trials Stomach ulcer Peptic-ulcer Symptoms Peptic-ulcer Causes Peptic-ulcer Diagnosis Peptic-ulcer Treatment Peptic-ulcer Complications Introduction  Stomach ulcers, also known as gastric ulcers, are open sores that develop on the lining of the stomach. Ulcers can also occur in part of the intestine just beyond the stomach \u2013 these are known as duodenal ulcers. Both stomach and duodenal ulcers are sometimes referred to as peptic ulcers. Here the term \u201Cstomach ulcer\u201D will be used, although the information applies equally to duodenal ulcers. Signs and symptoms The most common symptom of a stomach ulcer is a burning or gnawing pain in the centre of the abdomen (tummy). However, stomach ulcers aren't always painful and some people may experience other symptoms, such as indigestion, heartburn and feeling sick. Read more about the symptoms of a stomach ulcer and diagnosing a stomach ulcer. When to seek medical advice You should visit your GP if you think you may have a stomach ulcer. Seek urgent medical advice if you experience any of the following symptoms: vomiting blood \u2013 the blood can appear bright red or have a dark brown, grainy appearance, similar to coffee grounds passing dark, sticky, tar-like stools a sudden, sharp pain in your tummy that gets steadily worse These could be a sign of a serious complication, such as internal bleeding (see below). What causes stomach ulcers? Stomach ulcers occur when the layer that protects the stomach lining from stomach acid breaks down, which allows the stomach lining to become damaged. This is usually a result of : an infection with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen or aspirin \u2013 particularly if they're taken for a long time or at high doses It used to be thought that stress or certain foods might cause stomach ulcers, but there's little evidence to suggest this is the case. Read more about the causes of stomach ulcers. Who is affected It's not known how many people have stomach ulcers, although they're thought to be quite common. Some studies have found that around 1 in 10 people may get a stomach ulcer at some point in their life. Stomach ulcers can affect people of any age, including children, but mostly occur in people aged 60 or over. Men are more commonly affected than women. How stomach ulcers are treated With treatment, most stomach ulcers will heal within a month or two. The treatment recommended for you will depend on what caused the ulcer. Most people will be prescribed a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) to reduce the amount of acid their stomach produces, and allow the ulcer to heal naturally. If an H. pylori infection is responsible for the ulcers, antibiotics will also be used to kill the bacteria, which should prevent the ulcer coming back. If the ulcers are caused by the use of NSAIDs, PPIs are usually prescribed and your doctor will discuss whether you should keep using NSAIDs. Alternative medication to NSAIDs, such as paracetamol, may be recommended. Stomach ulcers can come back after treatment, although this is less likely to happen if the underlying cause is addressed. Read more about treating stomach ulcers. Possible complications Complications of stomach ulcers are relatively uncommon, but they can be very serious and potentially life-threatening. The main complications include: bleeding at the site of the ulcer the stomach lining at the site of the ulcer splitting open \u2013 known as perforation the ulcer blocking the movement of food through the digestive system \u2013 known as gastric obstruction Read more about the complications of stomach ulcers. Page last reviewed: 21\/05\/2015 Next review due: 21\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 718 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 345  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Peptic ulcer Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. A peptic ulcer is a painful condition that affects as many as one in eight people in the UK. But sufferers don\u2019t have to put up with the discomfort. There are now effective ways of getting rid of ulcers. Dr John Bennett explains. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Abdominal (tummy) pain Digestive health NSAIDs External links CORE charity: peptic ulcers Lab Tests Online UK: H. pylori test Which painkiller? The drugs you should take to treat pain depend on what type of pain you have Find and choose services for stomach ulcer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/mitral-valve-problems","content":"Mitral valve problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Mitral valve problems   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Mitral valve problems Introduction  The mitral valve (also called the bicuspid valve) separates the upper left heart chamber from the lower left heart chamber, and helps control blood flow through the heart. During each heartbeat, the smaller upper chambers of the heart (atria) contract to push blood into the larger lower chambers (ventricles). The mitral valve opens to allow this passage of blood from the left atrium, and closes when the left ventricle is full of blood, to prevent backflow. When the valve closes, its two leaflets (flaps) normally seal the valve shut. Tendons attached to these flaps keep them taut and prevent them collapsing through to the other side. Problems affecting the mitral valve Problems with the mitral valve can make the heart less efficient at pumping blood around the body. Severe problems can lead to heart failure (where the heart can no longer pump enough blood around the body) if the valve is not surgically repaired or replaced. Common mitral valve problems are: mitral regurgitation (also called 'mitral incompetence') \u2013 where there is a backflow of blood through the valve, often as a result of a problem called mitral valve prolapse (where the valve collapses) mitral stenosis \u2013 where the valve doesn't open as wide as it should, restricting blood flow These conditions can occur alone or in combination. They are covered in more detail below. Mitral regurgitation Mitral regurgitation means there is a backflow of blood from the left ventricle to the left atrium when the heart contracts during a heartbeat. This can cause symptoms such as shortness of breath, tiredness, dizziness and chest pain, and it can lead to atrial fibrillation (a condition that causes an irregular and often abnormally fast heart rate), pulmonary hypertension (high pressure inside the vessels carrying blood from the heart to the lungs) and heart failure. Mitral regurgitation can happen when the mitral valve flaps fail to seal shut, either because of problems with the flaps (such as a mitral valve prolapse \u2013 see below) or due to widening of the mitral annulus, which is the ring of muscle surrounding the valve. These problems are more common in older people and are often the result of changes to the heart with age. For example, the mitral valve may become weaker due to 'wear and tear' or damage caused by persistent high blood pressure. Occasionally, mitral regurgitation can occur as a result of rheumatic heart disease (a complication of rheumatic fever), cardiomyopathy (a disease of the heart muscle), endocarditis (infection of the inner lining of the heart), or congenital heart disease (birth defects affecting the normal workings of the heart). If regurgitation is only mild, you may just be monitored at regular intervals with echocardiography (an scan of the heart) to check your heart function. If you have moderate or severe mitral regurgitation, you'll probably need surgery to repair or replace the valve (see below). You may also need medications called nitrates or diuretics to reduce symptoms such as shortness of breath, and medication to treat atrial fibrillation. If you have severe mitral regurgitation and you are not suitable for surgery, or you are still having problems after surgery, you may be offered medications called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or beta-blockers to help manage the condition. Mitral valve prolapse Mitral valve prolapse means that one or more of the mitral flaps are floppy and don't close tightly, often leading to backflow of blood (mitral regurgitation \u2013 see above). Most people with a mitral valve prolapse will not have symptoms, unless the problem causes severe mitral regurgitation, and it is usually discovered by chance during echocardiography (an ultrasound scan of the heart) carried out for a different reason. Occasionally, however, mitral valve prolapse can cause problems such as arrhythmia (an irregular heartbeat) and palpitations (sudden, noticeable heartbeats). Mitral valve prolapse can be caused by problems with the connective tissues (chords) that join the mitral valve to the heart muscles or, more rarely, by damage to the heart muscles themselves as the result of a heart attack. Some people with the condition are born with it and it's more common in people with connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome. If mitral valve prolapse isn't causing any symptoms and you are at low risk of developing severe mitral regurgitation, you won't need surgical treatment. Mild symptoms can sometimes be controlled with lifestyle changes, such as giving up cigarettes, caffeine and alcohol, because these can cause your heart to become overstimulated.  Surgical repair or replacement of the valve (see below) may be recommended if you have: severe mitral regurgitation causing symptoms no symptoms but an enlarged lower heart chamber severe mitral regurgitation with atrial fibrillation or pulmonary hypertension Mitral valve stenosis Mitral valve stenosis occurs when the mitral valve doesn't open as wide as it should, restricting the flow of blood through the heart. As a result, less blood can get to the body and the upper heart chamber swells as pressure builds up. Blood and fluid can also collect in the lungs, making it hard for you to breathe. The most common cause of mitral valve stenosis in adults is rheumatic fever, which can occur five to 10 years before the heart valve problems began. Rheumatic fever causes the valve to become inflamed (swollen), and over time the flaps of the inflamed valve stick together and become scarred, rigid and thickened. Rarer causes of mitral valve stenosis include calcium deposits forming around the valve, radiation treatment to the chest and some medications. Mitral valve stenosis may not cause any symptoms, but common warning signs include shortness of breath and an abnormally fast heart rhythm (atrial fibrillation). If you don't have any symptoms, your heart function may just be monitored at regular intervals with echocardiography (an ultrasound scan of the heart). Some people will be offered medications called nitrates or diuretics to reduce the build-up of fluid in the lungs, medication to treat atrial fibrillation and medication to prevent blood clots. If you have symptoms, you're at risk of heart failure if you do not have an operation either to open up the valve (percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty) or have it replaced. See below for more information about these procedures. Left untreated, moderate to severe mitral stenosis can lead to heart failure. Surgery for mitral valve problems  If you have a severe case of mitral regurgitation, mitral valve prolapse or mitral valve stenosis, you will usually need to have a heart valve operation. Most heart valve operations are performed under general anaesthetic (where you are asleep). They usually involve making a cut down the middle of the breastbone, although some surgeons are increasingly carrying out these operations using small incisions between the ribs (a 'minimal access' approach).  Sometimes it's possible to perform the surgery using a 'percutaneous' method, which involves feeding a catheter (thin, flexible tube) into a large vein in your neck or groin and guiding this through to your heart. People tend to recover more quickly from this procedure, but the results are often less predictable. The most common mitral valve procedures are: mitral valve repair surgery mitral valve replacement surgery percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty These procedures are briefly explained below, but your surgeon or heart specialist will explain any operation in detail to you, including the risks and benefits. It is also possible to carry out procedures similar to mitral valve repair using percutaneous techniques, but these are not covered in any detail here because they not widely used and there are still some uncertainties about them. For more information, you can read: NICE guidelines on percutaneous mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation  NICE guidelines on percutaneous mitral valve annuloplasty  Mitral valve repair surgery  Repairing the mitral valve flaps is the main surgical treatment for mitral regurgitation.  The operation is carried out under general anaesthetic and your surgeon will usually gain access to your heart through an incision made along your chest. Some surgeons may also perform this type of operation using laparoscopic (\u2018keyhole\u2019) techniques, and the advantages of this approach are still being evaluated. The two flaps of the mitral valve are then partially clipped or sewn together to reduce the amount of blood leaking backwards by keeping the flaps close together during each heart contraction. This operation is generally successful, with only a small chance of major complications. Mitral valve replacement surgery Mitral valve replacement is usually only considered if you're unable to have the valve repaired. You will need it if your valve is furred up with calcium deposits or if the leaflets of your valve do not move. During surgery, your mitral valve is replaced with either a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve, which is made from animal tissue. This is major open heart surgery performed under general anaesthetic and usually involves making an incision along your chest. You'll be put on a heart-lung bypass machine during the operation, which takes over the function of your heart and lungs while the procedure is carried out. You will  usually need to take medication to prevent blood clots for a long period after this operation. This operation is generally successful, with a small chance of major complications, although the risk of serious and life-threatening problems is generally higher than with mitral valve repair surgery. Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty Balloon valvuloplasty, also known as percutaneous mitral commissurotomy, is a non-surgical treatment option for mitral valve stenosis. It's usually performed by a cardiologist (heart specialist) using just a local anaesthetic (where you remain awake but your skin is numbed). A catheter is inserted through your skin via a large vein in your groin or neck and passed through to your heart. The tip of the catheter, which has a balloon attached, is positioned directly inside the narrowed valve. The balloon is inflated and deflated several times to widen the valve opening, before the balloon is deflated and removed. This procedure is most commonly used in young patients who do not have too much calcium deposited on their valve, pregnant women, and patients who are at an increased risk of developing complications from a mitral valve replacement (see above). Using this method is generally less predictable and less reliable than accessing the valve directly, although recovery is generally faster. Some mitral valve problems can be treated by replacing the faulty valve  Community content from HealthUnlocked Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you Page last reviewed: 30\/09\/2014 Next review due: 30\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 313 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atrial fibrillation Heart failure Rheumatic fever Shortness of breath External links British Heart Foundation: heart valve disease NICE: percutaneous mitral valve annuloplasty NICE: percutaneous mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation Heart failure Find out about heart failure, a serious condition in which the heart is unable to pump blood properly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Perforated eardrum","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Perforated-eardrum","content":"Perforated eardrum - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Perforated eardrum  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Perforated-eardrum Clinical trials Perforated eardrum Perforated-eardrum Surgery Introduction  A perforated eardrum is a hole or tear in the eardrum. It can be uncomfortable, but usually heals within a few weeks or months provided your ear is kept dry and there\u2019s no infection. The eardrum, also known as the tympanic membrane, is a thin layer of tissue that separates the outer ear from the middle ear. A hole in the eardrum can be caused by: a middle ear infection, if pus builds up inside your ear and puts pressure on your eardrum an injury to the eardrum, such as a severe blow to the ear or poking an object such as a cotton bud deep into the ear a sudden loud noise, such as a loud explosion changes in air pressure, such as pressure changes while flying at high altitude or when scuba diving Signs and symptoms One of the main symptoms of a perforated eardrum is hearing loss. This can vary in severity, depending on the size of the hole, and usually goes back to normal once your eardrum has healed. Some people also have symptoms of a middle ear infection, such as: earache or discomfort a discharge of mucus from your ear a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above You may have some ringing or buzzing in your ear (tinnitus) as well. When to see your GP See your GP if you have persistent symptoms of a perforated eardrum.  Although your eardrum will usually heal itself eventually, treatment may be necessary to prevent infections and help improve your hearing. Your GP will use a special instrument called an auriscope or otoscope to examine your eardrum. These have a light and a lens that allow your GP to see any holes or tears in the eardrum. Treating a perforated eardrum Perforated eardrums don't always need to be treated because they normally heal by themselves in a few weeks or months provided that your ear is kept dry and there\u2019s no infection. If you have any pain or discomfort, you can take over-the-counter painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. Never give aspirin to children under 16. Placing a warm flannel against the affected ear may also help relieve the pain. Your GP may prescribe antibiotics if your perforated eardrum was caused by an infection or if there is a risk that an infection will develop while your eardrum heals. You can reduce your risk of developing an infection by keeping your ear dry until it's healed. Don't go swimming, and cover your ears when having a shower. You may need surgery to repair your eardrum if the hole is particularly large or doesn't heal. The procedure used to repair a perforated eardrum is known as a myringoplasty.  Read more about surgery for a perforated eardrum. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/03\/2015 Next review due: 02\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 499 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 264  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 61  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful The ear JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Earache Hearing loss Middle ear infection Tinnitus External links Action on Hearing Loss Hearing problems How to protect your hearing, with tips on spotting when you're going deaf, getting tested and hearing aids NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pericarditis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pericarditis","content":"Pericarditis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pericarditis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pericarditis Clinical trials Pericarditis Pericarditis Symptoms Pericarditis Causes Pericarditis Diagnosis Pericarditis Treatment Pericarditis Complications Introduction  Pericarditis is swelling of the pericardium, which is the fluid-filled sac surrounding your heart. The main symptom of pericarditis is chest pain. This can be a sudden, sharp and stabbing pain behind your breastbone or more of a dull ache. The pain is often worse when lying down or breathing in, and better when sitting up. Pericarditis is not usually a serious condition and may be treated on an outpatient basis, so you don't have to be admitted to hospital. Read more about the symptoms of pericarditis. Types of pericarditis There are three main types of pericarditis: acute pericarditis \u2013 where the symptoms last less than three months (with treatment, symptoms normally resolve within a week) and often appear after flu-like symptoms recurring pericarditis \u2013 where someone has repeated episodes of acute pericarditis chronic pericarditis \u2013 a complication of pericarditis, where the symptoms last longer than three months Why does pericarditis happen? In most cases of pericarditis, no cause is identified. However, an infection is usually thought to be responsible. Other things that may cause pericarditis include chest injury, some cancers and some treatments, such as radiotherapy or chemotherapy. Problems with the body's immune system may also play a role in recurring and chronic pericarditis. Read more about the causes of pericarditis. How is pericarditis treated? Acute pericarditis can usually be treated with medication to reduce swelling, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), although antibiotics may be used if there is a bacterial infection. A medication called colchicine is often used for recurring pericarditis, as it can prevent symptoms returning. Treatment for chronic pericarditis will depend on the underlying cause. Some cases respond well to medication, while others may require surgery. Read more about treating pericarditis. Cardiac tamponade In rare cases, pericarditis can trigger a serious complication known as cardiac tamponade. This is an excess build-up of fluid inside the pericardium. The extra fluid places too much pressure on the heart, so it is unable to beat properly. Cardiac tamponade can cause symptoms such as: light-headedness blurred vision palpitations nausea Cardiac tamponade also often occurs alongside inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis). This causes pain that feels like pressure on the chest, similar to a heart attack. Cardiac tamponade is life-threatening and requires emergency treatment. If you have a history of pericarditis and develop the symptoms listed above, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Read more about the complications of pericarditis. Who is affected? Pericarditis is a relatively common heart condition. Around 5% of all admissions to accident and emergency (A&E) departments for severe chest pain are diagnosed as pericarditis. Pericarditis tends to be more common in men than women. It can affect people of all ages, but mostly occurs in young adults. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2014 Next review due: 03\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 224 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 115  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Heart attack Heart failure Tuberculosis Heart health Healthy weight calculator External links British Heart Foundation Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight Arrhythmias Find out what you need to know about arrhythmias or heart rhythm problems NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Periods","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods","content":"Periods - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Periods  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods   A period is the part of the menstrual cycle when a woman bleeds from her vagina for a few days. For most women this happens every 28 days or so, but it's common for periods to start sooner or later than this, ranging from day 24 to day 35. Your period can last between three and eight days, but it will usually last for about five days. The bleeding tends to be heaviest in the first two days. When your period is at its heaviest, the blood will be red. On lighter days, it may be pink, brown or black. You'll lose about 30 to 72 millilitres (5 to 12 teaspoons) of blood during your period, although some women bleed more heavily than this. Read more about heavy periods, period pain, irregular periods and stopped or missed periods. This page covers: When do periods start? Sanitary products Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) Getting pregnant Changes in your periods When do periods stop? When do periods start? Girls have their first period during puberty \u2013 11 is the average age for puberty to start in girls. A girl's monthly periods usually begin at around the age of 12, although some girls will start them later. A delay in starting periods isn't usually a cause for concern. Most girls will have regular periods from age 16 to 18. Read more about girls and puberty. Sanitary products Sanitary products absorb or collect the blood released during your period. The main types of sanitary products are described below. Sanitary pads Sanitary pads are strips of padding that have a sticky side you attach to your underwear to hold them in place. One side of the pad is made of a special absorbent material that soaks up the blood. Many women use sanitary pads when they first start their period because they're easy to use. They come in many sizes, so you can change them depending on how heavy or light your period is. Pantyliners are a smaller and thinner type of sanitary pad that can be used on days when your period is very light. Tampons Tampons are small tubes of cotton wool that you insert into your vagina to absorb the blood before it comes out of your body. There's a string at one end of the tampon, which you pull to remove it. Tampons come with instructions that explain how to use them. If the tampon is inserted correctly, you shouldn't be able to feel it. If you can feel it or it hurts, it might not be in properly. It isn't possible for a tampon to get stuck or lost inside you. Your vagina holds it firmly in place and it expands inside you as it soaks up the blood. For more information, see: Can a tampon get lost inside me? What if I forget to remove my tampon? Menstrual cups Menstrual cups are an alternative to sanitary pads and tampons. The cup is made from medical-grade silicone and you put it inside your vagina. Menstrual cups collect the blood rather than absorbing it. Unlike sanitary pads and tampons, which are thrown away after they've been used, menstrual cups can be washed and used again. Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) Changes in your body's hormone levels before your monthly period can cause physical and emotional changes. This is often known as premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or premenstrual tension (PMT). There are many possible symptoms of PMS, but typical symptoms include: feeling bloated breast tenderness mood swings feeling irritable loss of interest in sex These symptoms usually improve when your period starts and disappear a few days afterwards. PMS doesn't affect all women who have periods. Getting pregnant Working out when you can get pregnant \u2013 your fertile time \u2013 can be difficult. It's around the time you ovulate, which is about 12 to 14 days before the start of your next period. However, sperm can survive inside a woman's body for days before ovulation occurs. This means your fertile time extends back earlier in your cycle. You can calculate when your period will start and your peak ovulation times using an online period calendar. You can't get pregnant if you don't ovulate. Some hormonal methods of contraception, such as the combined pill, contraceptive patch and contraceptive injection, work by preventing ovulation. Read more about the menstrual cycle, fertility, contraception and getting pregnant. Changes in your periods Your periods can change \u2013 for example, they may last longer or get lighter. This doesn't necessarily mean there's a problem, but it does need to be investigated. You can go to see your GP, or you can visit your nearest women's clinic or contraceptive clinic. Bleeding between periods, bleeding after having sex, or bleeding after the menopause needs to be checked by a doctor. It might be caused by an infection, abnormalities in the neck of the womb (the cervix) or, in rare cases, it could be cancer. You could be pregnant if you miss a period and you've had sex. See your GP if you've taken a pregnancy test and the result is negative (you're not pregnant) and you've missed three consecutive periods. Your GP will investigate the cause and recommend any necessary treatment. Read more about stopped or missed periods. When do periods stop? Your periods will continue until you reach the menopause, which usually occurs when you are in your late 40s to mid-50s. In the UK the average age of menopause is 51. Your periods may start to become less frequent over a few months or years before stopping altogether. In some cases they can stop suddenly. Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2016 Next review due: 28\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 303 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Heavy periods Irregular periods Period pain Stopped or missed periods External links Easy Health: periods TeensHealth: puberty and periods Starting periods Tips for parents on when to talk to girls (and boys) about periods, and what to tell them Menstrual cycle Find out about the menstrual cycle, periods, what's normal, PMS and fertility Menopause Find out about the menopause, which is when a woman stops having monthly periods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Bleeding or spotting between periods","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/chq\/Pages\/976.aspx?CategoryID=60","content":"What causes bleeding between periods? - Health questions - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: Common health questions What causes bleeding between periods? What causes bleeding between periods? There are many different causes of bleeding between periods. Some may not be anything to worry about, but seek medical advice if you\u2019re concerned.   Hormonal contraceptives Irregular bleeding, such as bleeding between periods, is common during the first three months of starting hormonal contraception, such as the: combined oral contraceptive pill  progestogen-only contraceptive pill  contraceptive patch (transdermal patch) contraceptive implant or injection  intrauterine system (IUS)  If you\u2019re concerned about bleeding, or it lasts longer than three months, you should seek medical advice. You may also bleed between periods if you: miss any combined pills  miss any progestogen-only pills  have a problem with your patch or vaginal ring   are on the pill and are also sick or have diarrhoea  have taken certain prescription medicine or St John\u2019s Wort (a herbal remedy) and you\u2019re on the pill, patch, ring or implant  miss out your pill-, patch- or ring-free week Other causes Some other causes of irregular or abnormal bleeding include:    taking the emergency contraceptive pill   injury or disease of the vagina \u2013 for example, from having rough sex, an infection, ulcer or varicose veins  a recent abortion \u2013 if you\u2019re bleeding heavily, seek medical advice  sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as chlamydia \u2013 if you\u2019ve recently had unprotected sex with a new partner, it\u2019s a good idea to get tested     reproductive hormones not working normally \u2013 this is common in women approaching the menopause or in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) stress vaginal dryness harmless changes to the cervix (neck of the womb) \u2013 this may be called ectropion or cervical erosion cervical cancer \u2013 if you\u2019re aged 25-64, you should be having regular cervical screening tests to detect any changes to your cervix. Even if you are up to date with screening tests you should seek advice about irregular bleeding, especially bleeding after sex, to eliminate the possibility of cervical cancer.  womb (uterus or uterine) cancer \u2013 this is more common in women who have been through the menopause, and most cases of endometrial cancer are diagnosed in women aged over 50. Women over 40 with bleeding between periods should see their GP to eliminate the possibility of uterine cancer. cervical or endometrial polyps (benign or non-cancerous growths in the womb or the lining of the cervix) When to seek medical advice If you\u2019re concerned about your bleeding, you should: see your GP visit a sexual health or GUM (genitourinary medicine) clinic A healthcare professional will talk to you about your symptoms. Depending on your situation, they may suggest carrying out some tests, such as: tests for STIs, which may include an examination of your genitals a pregnancy test a cervical screening test, if you\u2019re aged 25-64 and not up-to-date with these  a pelvic ultrasound scan  To diagnose some conditions, you may need an examination, such as:  a speculum examination \u2013 a speculum is a medical instrument that is inserted into your vagina  an internal examination of your vagina with the fingers (bimanual examination)   Read the answers to more questions about women\u2019s health Further information: Am I pregnant?  Does the pill interact with other medicines?  Contraception  Irregular periods    STIs  Menstrual cycle  Find services: sexual health    Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Page last reviewed: 03\/11\/2014 Next review due: 02\/11\/2016 More about: women's health Menopause Pregnancy and baby guide Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus fpa (Family Planning Association) Breast cancer Periods: do I need to see a doctor? NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Periods, absent","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods-absent","content":"Stopped or missed periods - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stopped or missed periods  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods-absent Clinical trials Stopped or missed periods   There are many reasons why a woman may miss her usual monthly period, or why periods might stop altogether. Most women have a period every 28 days or so, but it's common to have a slightly shorter or longer cycle than this (from 24 to 35 days). Some women don't always have a regular menstrual cycle. Their period may be early or late, and how long it lasts and how heavy it is may vary each time. Read more about irregular periods and heavy periods. This page covers: Why your periods might stop When to see your GP Why your periods might stop There are a number of reasons why your periods can stop. The most common reasons are: pregnancy  stress  sudden weight loss  being overweight or obese extreme overexercising  taking the contraceptive pill reaching the menopause  polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)  Periods can also sometimes stop as a result of a long-term medical condition, such as heart disease, uncontrolled diabetes, an overactive thyroid, or premature ovarian failure. Pregnancy You might be pregnant if you're sexually active and your period is late. Pregnancy is a common reason why periods unexpectedly stop. It can sometimes happen if the contraception you're using fails. It might be that your period is simply late, so you could wait a few days to see if it arrives. If it doesn't arrive, you can do a pregnancy test to confirm whether or not you're pregnant. It's important to be aware that you can get pregnant in the days after your period is normally due. This can happen if the release of an egg (ovulation) is delayed \u2013 for example, as a result of illness or stress. Stress If you're stressed, your menstrual cycle can become longer or shorter, your periods may stop altogether, or they might become more painful. Try to avoid becoming stressed by making sure you have time to relax. Regular exercise, such as running, swimming and yoga, can help you relax. Breathing exercises can also help. If you're finding it hard to cope with stress, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) may be recommended. CBT is a talking therapy that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and act. Sudden weight loss Excessive or sudden weight loss can cause your periods to stop. Severely restricting the amount of calories you eat stops the production of hormones needed for ovulation. Your GP may refer you to a dietitian if you're underweight, where you have a body mass index (BMI) of less than 18.5. The dietitian will be able to advise you about how to regain weight safely. If your weight loss is caused by an eating disorder, such as anorexia, you'll be referred to a psychiatrist. Being overweight or obese Being overweight or obese can also affect your menstrual cycle. If you're overweight, your body may produce an excess amount of oestrogen, one of the hormones that regulate the reproductive system in women. The excess oestrogen can affect how often you have periods, and can also cause your periods to stop. Your GP may refer you to a dietitian if you're overweight or obese, with a BMI of 30 or more, and it's affecting your periods. The dietitian will be able to advise you about losing weight safely. Extreme overexercising The stress that intense physical activity places on your body can affect the hormones responsible for your periods. Losing too much body fat through intense exercise can also stop you ovulating. You'll be advised to reduce your level of activity if excessive exercise has caused your periods to stop. If you're a professional athlete, you may benefit from seeing a doctor who specialises in sports medicine. They'll be able to give you advice about how to maintain your performance without disrupting your periods. Contraceptive pill You might miss a period every so often if you're taking the contraceptive pill. This isn't usually a cause for concern. Some types of contraception, such as the progestogen-only pill, contraceptive injection and intrauterine system (IUS), particularly Mirena, can cause periods to stop altogether. However, your periods should return when you stop using these types of contraception. Menopause You may start missing periods as you approach the menopause. This is because oestrogen levels will start to decrease, and ovulation will become less regular. After the menopause, your periods will stop completely. The menopause is a natural part of the ageing process in women, which usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 55. The average age for a woman to reach the menopause is 51 in the UK. However, around 1 in 100 women experience the menopause before the age of 40. This is known as premature menopause or premature ovarian failure. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Polycystic ovaries contain a large number of harmless follicles, which are underdeveloped sacs in which eggs develop. If you have PCOS, these sacs are often unable to release an egg, which means ovulation doesn't take place. PCOS is thought to be very common, affecting about 1 in every 10 women in the UK. The condition is responsible for as many as one in three cases of stopped periods. When to see your GP See your GP if you're not pregnant \u2013 you've had a negative pregnancy test \u2013 and you've missed more than three periods in a row. If you're sexually active and you haven't taken a pregnancy test, your GP may advise you to take one. They may also ask you about: your medical history your family's medical history your sexual history any emotional issues you're having any recent changes in your body weight the amount of exercise you do Your GP may recommend waiting to see whether your periods return on their own. In some cases you may need treatment for your periods to return. You should also see your GP if your periods stop before you're 45 or you're still bleeding when you're over 55. Referral to a specialist If your GP thinks an underlying medical condition might have caused your periods to stop, they may refer you to a specialist. Depending on what your GP suspects is causing the problem, you may be referred to: a gynaecologist \u2013 a specialist in treating conditions that affect the female reproductive system an endocrinologist \u2013 a specialist in treating hormonal conditions You may have a full gynaecological examination and various tests, including: blood tests \u2013 to see whether you have abnormal levels of certain hormones, such as prolactin, thyroid-stimulating hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, or luteinising hormone an ultrasound scan, CT scan or MRI scan \u2013 to identify any problems with your reproductive system or the pituitary gland in your brain  Treating underlying conditions If test results indicate an underlying medical condition has caused your periods to stop, you may be offered treatment for your condition. For example, if the cause is PCOS, you may be advised to take the contraceptive pill or tablets containing a hormone called progesterone. Read more about the treatment of PCOS. If the cause is early menopause (premature ovarian failure), this means the ovaries no longer function normally. Hormone medication is usually recommended. Treatments to try include the contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Read about Johanna's experience of premature ovarian failure. If you have an overactive thyroid gland, you may be given medication to stop your thyroid gland producing too many hormones.  Read more about treating an overactive thyroid gland. Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2016 Next review due: 28\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 214 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Contraception Heavy periods Irregular periods Period pain Periods Return of periods after pregnancy Periods Find out about periods, including when they start and stop, sanitary products, premenstrual syndrome and pregnancy Pregnancy tests When you can take a test, start antenatal care, and what to do if the pregnancy is unplanned Menopause Find out about the menopause, which is when a woman stops having monthly periods NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Periods, heavy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods-heavy","content":"Heavy periods (menorrhagia) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heavy periods (menorrhagia)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods-heavy Clinical trials Heavy periods Periods-heavy Causes Periods-heavy Diagnosis Periods-heavy Treatment Introduction  Heavy periods, also called menorrhagia, is when a woman loses an excessive amount of blood during consecutive periods. Menorrhagia can occur by itself or in combination with other symptoms, such as menstrual pain (dysmenorrhoea). Heavy bleeding does not necessarily mean there is anything seriously wrong, but it can affect a woman physically, emotionally and socially, and can cause disruption to everyday life. See your GP if you are worried about heavy bleeding during or between your periods. How much is heavy bleeding? It is difficult to define exactly what a heavy period is because the amount of blood lost during a period can vary considerably between women. The average amount of blood lost during a period is 30-40 millilitres (ml), with 9 out of 10 women losing less than 80ml. Heavy menstrual bleeding is considered to be 60-80ml or more in each cycle. However, it is rarely necessary to measure blood loss. Most women have a good idea about how much bleeding is normal for them during their period and can tell when this amount increases or decreases. A good indication that your blood loss is excessive is if: you feel you are using an unusually high number of tampons or pads you experience flooding (heavy bleeding) through to your clothes or bedding you need to use tampons and towels together What causes heavy periods? In most cases, no underlying cause of heavy periods is identified. However, some conditions and treatments have been linked to menorrhagia, including: uterine fibroids intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUDs)  anticoagulant medication polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Read more about the causes of heavy periods. Diagnosing heavy periods Your GP should be able to diagnose heavy periods from your symptoms alone. The cause of the problem may sometimes need to be investigated further. This will usually involve having a pelvic examination. A blood test may also sometimes be recommended to check for anaemia (iron deficiency). If a cause is still not found, then you may have an ultrasound scan. Read more about diagnosing heavy periods. Treating heavy periods  In some cases, heavy periods do not need to be treated, as they can be a natural variation and may not disrupt your lifestyle. If treatment is necessary, medication is most commonly used first. However, it may take a while to find the medication most suitable for you, as their effectiveness is different for everyone and some also act as contraceptives. If medication doesn't work, surgery may also be an option. Read more about treating heavy periods. Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view this information in an accessible format please go to http:\/\/nhs.uk\/tools\/documents\/self_assessments_js\/packages\/as_54\/accessible.html What are periods? A period is part of a woman's menstrual cycle. The menstrual cycle is the time from the first day of a woman's period to the day before her next period. A period is a bleed from the womb (uterus) that is released through the vagina. It happens approximately every 28 days, although anywhere between 24 and 35 days is common. Periods can begin when girls are between 8 and 16 years old, but usually start around the age of 12. They continue every month until the menopause (when a woman's periods stop), which usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 55. Page last reviewed: 17\/10\/2014 Next review due: 17\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 448 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 176  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 70  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Endometriosis Fibroids The menstrual cycle Painful periods Periods Polycystic ovary syndrome What causes bleeding between periods? External links Easy Health: periods Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Women's Health Concern: health information How to tackle problem periods Symptoms and treatments of period problems, including painful or heavy periods, endometriosis and PMS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Periods, irregular","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods-irregular","content":"Irregular periods - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Irregular periods  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods-irregular Clinical trials Irregular periods Periods-irregular Causes Periods-irregular Treatment Introduction  Some women find their menstrual cycle isn't always regular. Their periods may be early or late, and may vary in how long they last or how heavy they are each time. Your normal menstrual cycle can be disturbed if you change your method of contraception, or if you have an imbalance of the reproductive hormones oestrogen and progesterone. Many factors can cause a hormone imbalance, from polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) to extreme weight loss and excessive exercise. Read more about the causes of irregular periods. Treating irregular periods Treatment for irregular periods may not always be necessary. However, you should see your GP if: you have bleeding or spotting between periods or after sex you have very heavy periods, where you need to change your tampon or pad every hour or two, or you have to wear both a pad and a tampon you experience heavy bleeding that floods into your bed or through your clothes  your periods last longer than seven days your periods are more frequent than once a month You may need a different contraceptive, or further investigations may be needed to find out whether you have an underlying health condition. Read more about treating irregular periods. The average menstrual cycle On average, a woman's menstrual cycle lasts 28 days, but cycles can vary from 24 to 35 days. After puberty, most women develop a regular menstrual cycle, with around the same length of time between periods. Menstrual bleeding usually lasts two to seven days, with the average being five days. Periods and period problems Read more about: periods (including an explanation of the menstrual cycle) heavy periods absent periods painful periods Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/04\/2015 Next review due: 26\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 226 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Absent periods Heavy periods Intrauterine device (IUD) Painful periods Periods Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Teen girls' health External links FPA: help and advice Lab Tests Online UK: FSH test Women's Health Concern: questions about periods Are your periods healthy? The signs that need a check-up, including bleeding after sex, between periods and after the menopause Are you worried about fertility? If you\u2019re a woman trying for a child and are worried you might be having problems, take this test. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Periods, painful","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Periods-painful","content":"Period pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Period pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Periods-painful Clinical trials Periods-painful Community Period pain   Period pain is common and a normal part of your menstrual cycle. Most women experience it at some point in their lives. It's usually felt as painful muscle cramps in the tummy, which can spread to the back and thighs. The pain sometimes comes in intense spasms, while at other times it may be dull but more constant. It may also vary with each monthly period. Some periods may cause little or no discomfort, while others may be more painful. Sometimes you may experience pelvic pain even when you don't have your period. This page covers: What causes period pain? How long will my period pain last? How can I treat period pain? When should I see my GP? Can period pain affect fertility? What causes period pain? Period pain occurs when the muscular wall of the womb tightens (contracts). Mild contractions continually pass through your womb, but they're usually so mild that most women can't feel them. During your period, the wall of the womb starts to contract more vigorously to encourage the womb lining to shed away as part of your monthly period. When the muscular wall of the womb contracts, it compresses the blood vessels lining your womb. This temporarily cuts off the blood supply \u2013 and hence oxygen supply \u2013 to your womb. Without oxygen, the tissues in your womb release chemicals that trigger pain. While your body is releasing these pain-triggering chemicals, it's also producing other chemicals called prostaglandins. These encourage the womb muscles to contract more, further increasing the level of pain. It's not known why some women experience more period pain than others. It may be that some women have a build-up of prostaglandins, which means they experience stronger contractions. Period pain caused by a condition Less commonly, period pain can be caused by an underlying medical condition. Doctors sometimes call this secondary dysmenorrhoea. Period pain linked to an underlying condition tends to affect older women. Women aged 30 to 45 are most commonly affected. Conditions that can cause period pain include: endometriosis \u2013 where cells that normally line the womb start to grow in other places, such as in the fallopian tubes and ovaries; these cells can cause intense pain when they shed and fall away fibroids \u2013 non-cancerous tumours that can grow in the womb and can make your periods heavy and painful pelvic inflammatory disease \u2013 where your womb, fallopian tubes and ovaries become infected with bacteria, causing them to become severely inflamed adenomyosis \u2013 where the tissue that normally lines the womb starts to grow within the muscular womb wall, making your periods particularly painful An intrauterine device (IUD) is a type of contraception made from copper and plastic that fits inside the womb. It can also sometimes cause period pain, particularly during the first few months after it's inserted. You may notice a change in your normal pattern of pain if your period pain is linked to one of the above conditions. For example, the pain may be more severe or it may last much longer than normal. If your period pain is caused by an underlying condition, you may also experience: irregular periods  bleeding in between periods a thick or foul-smelling vaginal discharge pain during sex See your GP if you experience any of these symptoms. How long will my period pain last? Period pain usually starts when your bleeding begins, although some women have pain several days before the start of their period. The pain normally lasts 48 to 72 hours, although it can last longer. It's usually at its worst when your bleeding is heaviest. Teenage girls often have period pain when they begin getting periods. Read more about starting periods. Period pain that doesn't have an underlying cause tends to improve as a woman gets older. Many women also notice an improvement after they've had children. How can I treat period pain? In most cases period pain is mild enough to treat at home. Painkillers You can take ibuprofen and aspirin to help manage your pain. However, don't take ibuprofen or aspirin if you have asthma or stomach, kidney or liver problems. Aspirin shouldn't be given to anyone under 16 years of age. You could also try paracetamol, but studies have shown that it doesn't reduce pain as effectively as ibuprofen or aspirin. If ordinary painkillers are ineffective, your GP may prescribe a stronger painkiller, such as naproxen or codeine. Other things to try You could also try: stopping smoking \u2013 smoking is thought to increase the risk of period pain exercise \u2013 you may not feel like exercising during a painful period, but keeping active can reduce pain; try some gentle swimming, walking or cycling heat \u2013 putting a heat pad or hot water bottle (wrapped in a tea towel) on your tummy may help reduce pain warm bath or shower \u2013 taking a warm bath or shower can relieve pain and help you relax massage \u2013 light, circular massage around your lower abdomen may also help reduce pain relaxation techniques \u2013 relaxing activities, such as yoga or pilates, may help distract you from feelings of pain and discomfort transcutaneous electronic nerve stimulation (TENS) \u2013 a small battery-operated device that delivers a mild electrical current to your tummy, which can help reduce pain When should I see my GP? See your GP if you have severe period pain or your normal pattern of periods changes \u2013 for example, if your periods become heavier than usual or irregular. You should also see your GP if you have symptoms of secondary dysmenorrhoea, such as intense pain or heavy or painful periods. The pill Your GP may try you on the combined oral contraceptive pill. This can ease period pain because it thins the womb lining and reduces the amount of prostaglandin your body releases. A thinner womb lining means the muscles of the womb don't have to contract as much when it sheds as part of your monthly menstrual cycle. Your period will also be lighter. If the combined contraceptive pill isn't suitable for you, contraceptive implants or injections are good alternatives. The Mirena intrauterine system (IUS) can also sometimes help with painful periods. Pelvic examination Your GP may want to carry out a pelvic examination to help diagnose or rule out other conditions. They'll insert gloved, lubricated fingers into your vagina to feel for any abnormalities in your womb or ovaries. Pelvic examinations are only carried out by qualified healthcare professionals, such as GPs or gynaecologists. The examination won't be carried out without your permission (consent). You can also choose to have a friend or relative present, or a practice nurse to act as a chaperone. In some cases your GP may also order a pelvic ultrasound, which will clearly highlight any abnormalities. Referral to a specialist If your period pain hasn't been controlled after three months of treatment with painkillers or the combined contraceptive pill, your GP may refer you to a specialist. This is for further investigations to rule out an underlying medical condition. Further tests To help determine the cause of your period pain, the gynaecologist may need to carry out: a urine or blood test pelvic ultrasound \u2013 where high-frequency sound waves are used to produce an image of the inside of your body; it's painless and will allow any abnormalities in your reproductive organs to be detected laparoscopy \u2013 under general anaesthetic, a small cut is made in your abdomen through which a fibro-optic telescope (laparoscope) is inserted; it can be used to look at your internal organs, as well as take samples of tissue (a biopsy) hysteroscopy \u2013 allows the inside of the womb to be examined using a fibro-optic telescope; it's carefully passed through your vagina and into the womb to check for abnormalities Treating an underlying medical condition If your period pain is caused by an underlying condition, your treatment will depend on which condition you have. For example, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) may require antibiotics to treat the infection, while fibroids may need to be surgically removed. Can period pain affect fertility? Period pain that's part of your normal menstrual cycle won't affect your fertility. However, if the cause is an underlying condition, this may affect your fertility. For example, endometriosis and pelvic inflammatory disease can cause scarring and a build-up of tissue in your fallopian tubes, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilise an egg. Fibroids and adenomyosis can affect the womb and cause pain and heavy menstrual bleeding. Page last reviewed: 28\/07\/2016 Next review due: 28\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 343 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Menstrual cycle: animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. This animation explains in detail how the menstrual cycle works. Media last reviewed: 21\/02\/2015 Next review due: 21\/02\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bleeding or spotting between periods Heavy periods Irregular periods Ovulation pain Periods Stopped or missed periods External links National Association for PMS Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG): patient information Women's Health Concern: period pain How to tackle problem periods Symptoms and treatments of period problems, including painful or heavy periods, endometriosis and PMS Menstrual cycle Find out about the menstrual cycle, periods, what's normal, PMS and fertility Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peripheral arterial disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/peripheralarterialdisease","content":"Peripheral arterial disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview peripheralarterialdisease Clinical trials Peripheral arterial disease peripheralarterialdisease Symptoms peripheralarterialdisease Causes peripheralarterialdisease Diagnosis peripheralarterialdisease Treatment peripheralarterialdisease Complications peripheralarterialdisease Prevention Introduction  Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a common condition, in which a build-up of fatty deposits in the arteries restricts blood supply to leg muscles. It is also known as peripheral vascular disease (PVD). Many people with PAD have no symptoms. However, some develop a painful ache in their legs when they walk, which usually disappears after a few minutes' rest. The medical term for this is \"intermittent claudication\". Read more about the symptoms of PAD. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you experience recurring leg pain when exercising. PAD is usually diagnosed through a physical examination by your GP, and by comparing the blood pressure in your arm and your ankle. A difference between the two may indicate PAD and is called the ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI). Read more about diagnosing PAD. What causes PAD? PAD is a form of cardiovascular disease (CVD), meaning it affects the blood vessels. It is usually caused by a build-up of fatty deposits in the walls of the leg arteries. The fatty deposits, called atheroma, are made up of cholesterol and other waste substances. The build-up of atheroma on the walls of the arteries makes the arteries narrower and restricts blood flow to the legs. This process is called atherosclerosis. Read more about the causes of PAD. Who is affected Your risk of developing PAD increases as you get older. It's estimated that around one in every five people over the age of 60 are affected by the condition to some degree. Men tend to develop the condition more often than women. There are certain things that can increase your chances of developing PAD and other forms of CVD, including: smoking \u2013 the most significant risk factor type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes high blood pressure high cholesterol By tackling these risk factors, you may be able to reduce your chances of developing PAD and other types of CVD. Read more about preventing PAD. How PAD is treated PAD is largely treated through lifestyle changes and medication. Exercising regularly and stopping smoking, if you smoke, are the main lifestyle changes that can ease the symptoms of PAD and reduce the chances of the condition getting worse. The underlying causes should also be treated, such as reducing high blood pressure and cholesterol, and diabetes. Medication, and in some cases surgery, can be used to improve the blood flow in your legs. With treatment, most people's symptoms will remain relatively stable, and some people may experience an improvement in their pain. If treatment is unsuccessful or you can't make appropriate lifestyle changes, there is a risk of potentially serious complications (see below). Read more about treating PAD.  Possible complications While PAD is not immediately life-threatening, the process of atherosclerosis that causes it can lead to serious and potentially fatal problems. Having PAD means you have a much higher risk of developing other serious forms of CVD, such as heart attack and stroke, because it is likely that blood vessels elsewhere in your body are also affected by atherosclerosis. If the symptoms of PAD get worse, there is a risk that leg tissue will begin to die (known as gangrene). In severe cases, the lower leg may have to be amputated. Read more about the complications of PAD. Peripheral arterial disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Peripheral arterial disease occurs when there is a blockage in the arteries in the limbs. An expert describes the causes of the condition, such as smoking and high blood pressure, and the risks associated with the condition. He also gives advice on treatment options and managing the disease. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2014 Next review due: 03\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 216 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atherosclerosis High cholesterol Diabetes High blood pressure Cardiovascular disease Gangrene Amputation External links British Heart Foundation: PAD Circulation Foundation: PAD NICE: Lower limb peripheral arterial disease Cardiovascular disease Find out about the different types of CVD and how you can reduce your risk of developing it Your NHS Health Check Millions of people have already had their free \"midlife MOT\". Find out why this health check-up is so important NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peripheral neuropathy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Peripheral-neuropathy","content":"Peripheral neuropathy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Peripheral neuropathy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Peripheral-neuropathy Clinical trials Peripheral-neuropathy Community Peripheral neuropathy Peripheral-neuropathy Symptoms Peripheral-neuropathy Causes Peripheral-neuropathy Diagnosis Peripheral-neuropathy Treatment Peripheral-neuropathy Complications   Peripheral neuropathy develops when nerves in the body's extremities \u2013 such as the hands, feet and arms \u2013 are damaged. The symptoms depend on which nerves are affected. In the UK, it's estimated that almost 1 in 10 people aged 55 or over are affected by some degree of peripheral neuropathy. The peripheral nervous system The peripheral nervous system is the network of nerves that lie outside the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). It includes different types of nerves with their own specific functions, including: sensory nerves \u2013 responsible for transmitting sensations, such as pain and touch motor nerves \u2013 responsible for controlling muscles autonomic nerves \u2013 responsible for regulating automatic functions of the body, such as blood pressure and bladder function Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy The main symptoms of peripheral neuropathy can include: numbness and tingling in the feet or hands burning, stabbing or shooting pain in affected areas loss of balance and co-ordination muscle weakness, especially in the feet These symptoms are usually constant, but may come and go. Read more about symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. When to see your GP It's important to see your GP if you experience the early symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, such as: pain, tingling or loss of sensation in the feet loss of balance or weakness a cut or ulcer on your foot that isn't getting better It's also recommended that people at highest risk of peripheral neuropathy, such as people with diabetes, have regular check-ups. Your GP will ask about your symptoms and may arrange some tests to help identify the underlying cause. You may be referred to hospital to see a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the nervous system). Generally, the sooner peripheral neuropathy is diagnosed, the better the chance of limiting the damage and preventing further complications. Read more about diagnosing peripheral neuropathy. Causes of peripheral neuropathy In the UK, diabetes (both type 1 and type 2) is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy. Over time, the high blood sugar levels associated with diabetes can damage the nerves. This type of nerve damage is known as diabetic polyneuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy can also have a wide range of other causes. For example, it can be caused by: physical injury to the nerves a viral infection such as shingles a side effect of certain medications or drinking too much alcohol People who are known to be at an increased risk of peripheral neuropathy may have regular check-ups so their nerve function can be assessed. Read more about the causes of peripheral neuropathy. Treating peripheral neuropathy Treatment for peripheral neuropathy depends on the symptoms and underlying cause. Only some of the underlying causes of neuropathy can be treated. For example, if you have diabetes it may help to gain better control of your blood sugar level, stop smoking and cut down on alcohol. Nerve pain may be treated with prescribed medications called neuropathic pain agents, as standard painkillers are often ineffective. If you have other symptoms associated with peripheral neuropathy, these may need to be treated individually. For example, treatment for muscle weakness may involve physiotherapy and the use of walking aids. Read more about treating peripheral neuropathy. Complications of peripheral neuropathy The outlook for peripheral neuropathy varies, depending on the underlying cause and which nerves have been damaged. Some cases may improve with time if the underlying cause is treated, whereas in some people the damage may be permanent or may get gradually worse with time. If the underlying cause of peripheral neuropathy isn't treated, you may be at risk of developing potentially serious complications, such as a foot ulcer that becomes infected. This can lead to gangrene (tissue death) if untreated, and in severe cases may mean the affected foot has to be amputated. Peripheral neuropathy may affect the nerves controlling the automatic functions of the heart and circulation system (cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy). You may need treatment to increase your blood pressure or, in rare cases, a pacemaker. Read more about complications of peripheral neuropathy. Polyneuropathy Peripheral neuropathy may affect: only one nerve (mononeuropathy) several nerves (mononeuritis multiplex) all the nerves in the body (polyneuropathy) Polyneuropathy is the most common type and starts by affecting the longest nerves first, so symptoms typically begin in the feet. Over time it gradually starts to affect shorter nerves so feels as if it's spreading upwards, later affecting the hands. Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 766 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 358  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 216  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetes Postherpetic neuralgia Trigeminal neuralgia Living with pain Living with diabetes Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Erythromelalgia External links Diabetes UK: neuropathy Gain charity Foundation for Peripheral Neuropathy Pain Concern Trigeminal Neuralgia Assocation UK Living with diabetes How to live healthily with diabetes, including advice on diet and lifestyle Diabetes and feet Foot health is especially important for people with diabetes. Find out how to take care of your feet and when to get help Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peritonitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Peritonitis","content":"Peritonitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Peritonitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Peritonitis Clinical trials Peritonitis Peritonitis Symptoms Peritonitis Causes Peritonitis Diagnosis Peritonitis Treatment Peritonitis Complications Introduction  Peritonitis is inflammation of the peritoneum, the thin layer of tissue that lines the inside of the abdomen (tummy). It is caused by an infection, which can rapidly spread around the body. Peritonitis requires immediate treatment and is a medical emergency. Signs of peritonitis often develop quickly and include: sudden abdominal pain that becomes more severe feeling sick (nausea) a lack of appetite a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above not passing any urine or passing less than normal Read more about the symptoms of peritonitis. When to get medical help Sudden abdominal pain that gradually gets worse is usually a sign of a potentially serious infection or illness. If you have this type of pain, contact your GP immediately. If this isn't possible, call NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service. Why peritonitis happens Peritonitis is caused by a bacterial or fungal infection that either develops directly in the peritoneum or spreads from another part of the body. Most cases of peritonitis are the result of infection or injury to another part of the body, such as: a split stomach ulcer a burst appendix digestive disorders, such as Crohn's disease or diverticulitis An infection that develops within the peritoneum isn't common and can be caused by: cirrhosis \u2013 scarring of the liver caused by long-term liver damage peritoneal dialysis \u2013 a widely used treatment for people with kidney failure Read more about the causes of peritonitis. How peritonitis is treated Peritonitis needs to be diagnosed and treated quickly to prevent possibly fatal complications developing, so you will usually be admitted to hospital for tests and treatment. The underlying infection will be treated with injections of antibiotics or antifungal medication, depending on the cause. In some cases, surgery may be required to repair the peritoneum or treat the underlying cause of the infection. Read more about diagnosing peritonitis and treating peritonitis. Complications Peritonitis can be fatal if the infection spreads through the bloodstream to the major organs (septic shock). It's estimated about 1 in every 10 people with peritonitis caused by bowel perforation (a hole that develops in the bowel wall) will die, although this can vary considerably depending on what caused the condition, your age, and your general health. Deaths are less common for peritonitis related to cirrhosis or kidney dialysis, but it's still a serious condition. Read more about the possible complications of peritonitis. Cirrhosis: Phil's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) is a major risk factor for peritonitis. In this video Phil talks about how he was diagnosed with cirrhosis. Media last reviewed: 28\/05\/2015 Next review due: 28\/05\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 18\/02\/2015 Next review due: 18\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 182 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 42  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cirrhosis Dialysis Sepsis External links Kidney Research UK: peritonitis NHS ambulance services Read about different ambulance services in England and find out when to call 999 Find and choose services for Peritonitis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peritonsillar abscess","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Quinsy","content":"Quinsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Quinsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Quinsy Clinical trials Quinsy Introduction  Quinsy, also known as a peritonsillar abscess, is a rare and potentially serious complication of tonsillitis. The abscess (a collection of pus) forms between one of your tonsils and the wall of your throat. This can happen when a bacterial infection spreads from an infected tonsil to the surrounding area. Quinsy can occur at any age, but most commonly affects teenagers and young adults. It's possible to get it more than once. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of quinsy can include: a severe and quickly worsening sore throat, usually on one side swelling inside the mouth and throat difficulty opening your mouth pain when swallowing difficulty swallowing, which may cause you to drool changes to your voice or difficulty speaking bad breath earache on the affected side headache and feeling generally unwell difficulty breathing Some people with quinsy may also have a high temperature (fever), although this sometimes passes before the abscess develops. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you or your child have symptoms of quinsy. Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine your throat and tonsils. These are the two small glands found at the back of your throat, behind your tongue. If quinsy is suspected, you will be referred immediately to a hospital ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further tests and treatment. It's important that quinsy is diagnosed and treated quickly to prevent the infection from spreading and to avoid serious problems caused by severe swelling, such as breathing difficulties. Treating quinsy People with quinsy usually need to be treated in hospital. Depending on how severe the infection is, you may need to stay in hospital for a few days and rest at home for a week or two afterwards. Medication You will be given antibiotics to clear the infection. These will usually be given directly into a vein (intravenously) at first, but you may switch to a short course of tablets or capsules once you are well enough leave hospital. Painkillers, such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, will be given to help ease any pain. You can continue to take these while you recover at home if necessary. Occasionally, corticosteroid medication may also be used to help reduce the swelling in your throat. Surgery and procedures In many cases, antibiotics alone are not effective, and it may be necessary to drain the pus from the abscess. This can be done by: needle aspiration \u2013 a long, fine needle is used to draw out the pus incision and drainage \u2013 a small cut (incision) is made over the affected area to drain the pus a tonsillectomy \u2013 an operation to remove your tonsils (this is rarely necessary while you have quinsy, but is often recommended at least six weeks after you\u2019ve recovered) You will often remain awake during a needle aspiration or incision and drainage procedure, but you will be given either a sedative to help you relax and\/or a local anaesthetic to numb the area being treated. Tonsillectomies and some incision and drainage procedures are carried out under general anaesthetic. This means you will be asleep and won't feel any pain while these procedures are carried out. Preventing quinsy One of the best ways to prevent quinsy is to reduce your risk of developing tonsillitis. You can help do this by avoiding close contact with people who have viral or bacterial infections that cause tonsillitis, regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water, and not sharing glasses or utensils with people who are ill. Smoking may increase your risk of quinsy, so stopping smoking may reduce your chances of getting it. Using antibiotics to treat viral tonsillitis doesn't significantly reduce the risk of quinsy and isn't routinely recommended. Page last reviewed: 08\/12\/2014 Next review due: 08\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 622 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 358  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antibiotics Sore throat Streptococcal infections Tonsillitis What if I miss a dose of antibiotics? The Antibiotic Awareness Campaign External links KidsHealth: tonsillitis Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections Your hospital stay Find out what to expect if you are admitted as inpatient to an NHS hospital, including advice about consent to treatment NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Permanent make-up","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/permanent-make-up.aspx","content":"Permanent make-up Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Permanent make-up Permanent make-up, also known as micropigmentation, is a cosmetic procedure to create long-lasting eyeliner, lipliner or eyebrow definition. The technique can also be used medically (\"medical micropigmentation\") to recreate areas affected by a health condition or skin problem. For example, it can be used to: create an image of a nipple for women who have had a mastectomy give the illusion of hair for people with hair loss camouflage scars or areas of skin affected by vitiligo Before you go ahead\u2026 It's important to be absolutely certain before you go ahead with permanent make-up or medical micropigmentation. Here are some things to weigh up: Cost: In the UK, the cost of cosmetic micropigmentation varies from £75 for a beauty spot to £500 for lip liner. You could pay a few hundred pounds for nipple reconstruction and a few thousand pounds for scalp coverage. Limitations: It may fade a little every year (some people decide to pay extra to maintain the look). There\u2019s no guarantee you\u2019ll achieve the desired effect. Mistakes are hard to fix (you'll need to undergo laser or chemical tattoo removal). Styles change \u2013 thick, well-defined eyebrows, for example, may not be so fashionable in five years time. Safety: Providers of micropigmentation don't have to be registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC), which is the independent regulator for health services in England. You should find a reputable practitioner who practises in a clean, safe and appropriate environment, with the processes in place to deal with any complications. Check their qualifications and training. Medical micropigmentation requires specific training, so make sure the practitioner is properly qualified if you choose this, and check with your doctor that it won\u2019t interfere with any planned treatment. You shouldn\u2019t consider micropigmentation if you\u2019re prone to keloid scarring. What it involves Consultation You should have a thorough consultation beforehand to discuss what type of look you would like to achieve and to agree the colour, position and shape of the desired effect. Find out about the process that would be followed if something were to go wrong. Take time to reflect on your decision. A patch test should also be done, to make sure you're not allergic to the pigment. On the day A local anaesthetic cream would be applied to the skin to numb it. The skin would then be sketched with a surgical pen. A sterile single-use needle would be inserted underneath the upper layers of skin to deposit pigmented granules. The pigment is usually iron oxide, which is least likely to cause allergic reactions and bleeding. Each time the needle is inserted, a droplet of pigment is released into the tiny hole created. You may feel a slight stinging. The procedure takes about one hour. You'll usually need two applications spaced four to six weeks apart, and \"maintenance\" or \"top-up\" treatments after one to three years, which will cost extra. Afterwards Your practitioner will apply a barrier cream. You\u2019ll be advised to apply this twice daily if you feel the area drying out and repeat this for up to 14 days, or until the area has fully healed. The area may feel itchy or be quite dry while it is healing. Initially, the colour may appear very intense. It takes about four weeks for the colour to fade to its permanent shade. The surrounding area may be red and a little swollen immediately after treatment and (depending on the procedure) for a few days afterwards. There may be a few spots of blood on the first day. You'll need to avoid direct jets from the shower or soaking in the bath for too long, as this may remove the pigment or increase the risk of infection. You'll also need to steer clear of chlorinated water (such as swimming pools) and exposure to sunlight until it has fully healed. It can take about two weeks to fully heal, after which time you'd be able to carry out your usual routine and use beauty products. Risks Possible risks of micropigmentation are: disappointing results (mistakes can be hard to fix) infection a skin reaction, such as swelling, cracking, peeling or blistering granulomas \u2013 tiny lumps that form under the skin around the pigment scarring, or overgrowths of scar tissue an allergic reaction to the pigment \u2013 but this is rare, as the patch test would usually pick this up MRI complications \u2013 rarely, some people have experienced swelling or burning in the tattooed area after having an MRI scan What to do if you have problems You should look out for problems with healing or skin pigmentation changes. If you have any symptoms or complications that require medical attention, it is best that you go back to the practitioner who treated you. If this is not possible, you can go to your GP or local accident and emergency (A&E) department. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 0 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links: News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation   NHS: information for patients undergoing nipple tattooing   Save Face: find a practitioner for non-surgical cosmetic procedures  Chemical peels Considering having a chemical peel? Read this advice first NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pernicious anaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency","content":"Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Clinical trials Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Community Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Symptoms Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Causes Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Diagnosis Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Treatment Anaemia-vitamin-B12-and-folate-deficiency Complications   Vitamin B12 or B9 (commonly called folate) deficiency anaemia occurs when a lack of vitamin B12 or folate causes the body to produce abnormally large red blood cells that can't function properly. Red blood cells carry oxygen around the body using a substance called haemoglobin. Anaemia is the general term for having either fewer red blood cells than normal or having an abnormally low amount of haemoglobin in each red blood cell. There are several different types of anaemia, and each one has a different cause. For example, iron deficiency anaemia, which occurs when the body doesn't contain enough iron. Symptoms of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency Vitamin B12 and folate perform several important functions in the body, including keeping the nervous system healthy. A deficiency in either of these vitamins can cause a wide range of problems, including: extreme tiredness a lack of energy pins and needles (paraesthesia) a sore and red tongue mouth ulcers muscle weakness disturbed vision psychological problems, which may include depression and confusion  problems with memory, understanding and judgement Some of these problems can also occur if you have a deficiency in vitamin B12 or folate, but don't have anaemia. Read about the symptoms of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. When to see your GP See your GP if you think you may have a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. These conditions can often be diagnosed based on your symptoms and the results of a blood test. It's important for vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia to be diagnosed and treated as soon as possible because, although many of the symptoms improve with treatment, some problems caused by the condition can be irreversible. Read about diagnosing vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Causes of a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency There are a number of problems that can lead to a vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, including: pernicious anaemia \u2013 where your immune system attacks healthy cells in your stomach, preventing your body from absorbing vitamin B12 from the food you eat; this is the most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency in the UK a lack of these vitamins in your diet \u2013 this is uncommon, but can occur if you have a vegan diet, follow a fad diet or have a generally poor diet for a long time medication \u2013 certain medications, including anticonvulsants and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), can affect how much of these vitamins your body absorbs  Both vitamin B12 deficiency and folate deficiency are more common in older people, affecting around 1 in 10 people aged 75 or over, and 1 in 20 people aged 65 to 74. Read about the causes of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Treating vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Most cases of vitamin B12 and folate deficiency can be easily treated with injections or tablets to replace the missing vitamins. Vitamin B12 supplements are usually given by injection at first. Then, depending on whether your B12 deficiency is related to your diet, you'll either require B12 tablets between meals or regular injections. These treatments may be needed for the rest of your life. Folic acid tablets are used to restore folate levels. These usually need to be taken for four months. In some cases, improving your diet can help treat the condition and prevent it recurring. Vitamin B12 is found in meat, fish, eggs, dairy products, yeast extract (such as Marmite) and specially fortified foods. The best sources of folate include green vegetables such as broccoli, Brussels sprouts and peas. Read about treating vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. Complications of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia Although it's uncommon, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency (with or without anaemia) can lead to complications, particularly if you've been deficient in vitamin B12 or folate for some time. Potential complications can include: problems with the nervous system temporary infertility heart conditions pregnancy complications and birth defects Adults with severe anaemia are also at risk of developing heart failure. Some complications improve with appropriate treatment, but others \u2013 such as problems with the nervous system \u2013 can be permanent.  Read about the complications of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. Page last reviewed: 16\/05\/2016 Next review due: 16\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 5198 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 728  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 556  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 265  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3508  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Vegetarian and vegan health Blood tests Iron deficiency anaemia Spina bifida External links Pernicious Anaemia Society Lab Tests Online UK: vitamin B12 and folate test Aplastic Anaemia Trust British Nutrition Foundation The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peroneal muscular atrophy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease","content":"Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Clinical trials Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Community Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Symptoms Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Causes Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Diagnosis Charcot-Marie-Tooth-disease Treatment Introduction  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a group of inherited conditions that damage the peripheral nerves. It's also known as hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN). The peripheral nerves are found outside the main central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). They control the muscles and relay sensory information, such as the sense of touch, from the limbs to the brain. People with CMT may have: muscle weakness in the feet, ankles, legs and hands an awkward way of walking (gait) highly arched or very flat feet numbness in the feet, arms and hands The symptoms of CMT usually start to appear between the ages of five and 15, although they sometimes don't develop until well into middle age or later. CMT is a progressive condition. This means the symptoms slowly get worse, making everyday tasks increasingly difficult. Read more about the symptoms of CMT What causes CMT? CMT is caused by an inherited fault in one of the many genes responsible for the development of the peripheral nerves. This fault means the nerves become damaged over time. A child with CMT may have inherited the genetic fault responsible for the disease from one or both of their parents. There's no single faulty gene that causes CMT. There are many varieties of CMT that are caused by different genetic faults and these can be inherited in several different ways. The chances of passing CMT to your child depend on the specific genetic faults you and your partner carry. Read more about the causes of CMT. Testing for CMT See your GP if you think you may be developing symptoms of CMT. If your GP suspects CMT, they'll refer you to a neurologist (a doctor who specialises in treating conditions of the nervous system) for further tests to confirm the diagnosis. You should also see your GP if you or your partner have a family history of CMT and are considering having a baby. Your GP can refer you for genetic counselling, where you can discuss your concerns and the options available with a genetics specialist. Read more about diagnosing CMT. How CMT is treated There's currently no cure for CMT. However treatments can help relieve symptoms, aid mobility and increase the independence and quality of life for people with the condition. These treatments may include: physiotherapy and certain types of exercise occupational therapy walking aids In some cases, surgery may be needed to correct problems such as flat feet and muscle contractures (where muscles shorten and lose their normal range of movement). Read more about treating CMT. Living with CMT CMT isn't life-threatening and most people with the condition have the same life expectancy as a person without the condition. However, it can make everyday activities very difficult. Living with a long-term, progressive condition can also have a significant emotional impact. Some people find it helpful to speak to others with the condition through support groups. You may also benefit from a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). You can find more information, support and practical advice about living with CMT on the CMT UK website. CMT UK is the main charity and support group for people with CMT in the UK. Information about you If you have CMT, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 22\/03\/2016 Next review due: 22\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 186 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is also known as hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. An expert explains what the disease is, how it affects the nervous system and the possible causes. There is currently no cure for CMT. Media last reviewed: 12\/05\/2016 Next review due: 12\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability Physiotherapy Hereditary neuropathy with pressure palsies (HNPP) Practical guide for carers External links CMT UK Muscular Dystrophy Campaign: CMT Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer Find and choose services for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Persistent trophoblastic disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/persistent-trophoblastic-disease","content":"Persistent trophoblastic disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma  Persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma are very rare pregnancy-related tumours known as gestational trophoblastic tumours (GTTs). Persistent trophoblastic disease In the UK, about 1 in 600 pregnancies each year are found to be a molar pregnancy, where the foetus and placenta do not form properly and a baby does not usually develop. This typically results in dilatation and curettage (D&C) and loss of the pregnancy (miscarriage). In most molar pregnancies, any remaining abnormal tissue in the womb spontaneously dies off. But in a small proportion of women, the tissue can remain and grow further into the lining of the womb and, like a cancer, spread to other areas of the body. This is known as persistent trophoblastic disease. Vaginal bleeding is the most common symptom of persistent trophoblastic disease. Further specialist treatment for persistent trophoblastic disease is needed to make sure that all of the remaining molar tissue is destroyed. In England, there are two specialist centres for treating the condition \u2013 Charing Cross Hospital in London and Weston Park Hospital in Sheffield. You may also need to have powerful cancer-killing medicine (chemotherapy) as part of your treatment. Choriocarcinoma Choriocarcinoma is a very rare type of cancer that occurs in around 1 in 50,000 pregnancies. It affects less than 20 women each year in the UK. Choriocarcinoma can develop if the cells left behind after a pregnancy become cancerous. This can happen after any pregnancy, but it is more likely after molar pregnancies. It can occur several months, or even years, after a pregnancy. Although choriocarcinoma starts in the womb, it can spread to other parts of the body \u2013 most commonly, the lungs. If it spreads to your lungs, you may have symptoms such as coughing, difficulty breathing and chest pain. If choriocarcinoma spreads to your abdomen, you may experience abdominal pain. If it spreads to your vagina, you may have heavy bleeding and a lump (nodule) may develop on your vagina. If it spreads to your brain, it may cause headaches or seizures. Risks Both persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma are very rare. If you have had a molar pregnancy, you will be monitored closely in case you develop either of these conditions. If you have had a complete molar pregnancy, you have about a 1 in 10 chance of developing either persistent trophoblastic disease or choriocarcinoma. If you have had a partial molar pregnancy, the risk is around 1 in 100. Outlook Overall, the outlook for persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma is excellent, and 98-100% of women who develop a gestational trophoblastic cancer are cured. However, the outlook for each case will depend on the individual's personal circumstances. Want to know more? Cancer Research UK: persistent trophoblastic disease and choriocarcinoma Charing Cross Hospital: Hydatidiform Mole and Choriocarcinoma UK Information and Support Service The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre What is cancer? The body is made up of millions of different types of cells. Cancer occurs when cells multiply in an abnormal way. When cancer affects organs and solid tissues, it causes a growth (tumour) to form. Cancer can occur in any part of the body where the cells multiply abnormally. Read more about cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 7 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Dilatation and curettage (D&C) Molar pregnancy External links Cancer Research UK Hydatidiform Mole and Choriocarcinoma UK Information and Support Service The Sheffield Trophoblastic Disease Centre Cancer Key messages about cancer, with links to fact sheets on all the different types Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Persistent vegetative state","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Vegetative-state","content":"Disorders of consciousness - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Disorders of consciousness  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vegetative-state Clinical trials Vegetative-state Disorders of consciousness Vegetative-state Causes Vegetative-state Diagnosis Introduction  A disorder of consciousness, or impaired consciousness, is a state where consciousness has been affected by damage to the brain. Consciousness requires both wakefulness and awareness. Wakefulness is the ability to open your eyes and have basic reflexes such as coughing, swallowing and sucking. Awareness is associated with more complex thought processes and is more difficult to assess. Currently, the assessment of awareness relies on physical responses being detected during an examination. The main disorders of consciousness are: coma vegetative state minimally conscious state Coma A coma is when a person shows no signs of being awake and no signs of being aware. A person in a coma lies with their eyes closed and doesn't respond to their environment, voices or pain. A coma usually lasts for less than two to four weeks, during which time a person may wake up or progress into a vegetative state or minimally conscious state. Read more about comas. Vegetative state A vegetative state is when a person is awake but is showing no signs of awareness. A person in a vegetative state may open their eyes, wake up and fall asleep at regular intervals and have basic reflexes, such as blinking when they're startled by a loud noise, or withdrawing their hand when it's squeezed hard. They're also able to regulate their heartbeat and breathing without assistance. However, a person in a vegetative state doesn't show any meaningful responses, such as following an object with their eyes or responding to voices. They also show no signs of experiencing emotions. If a person is in a vegetative state for a long time, it may be considered to be: a continuing vegetative state \u2013 when it's been longer than four weeks a permanent vegetative state \u2013 when it's been more than six months if caused by a non-traumatic brain injury, or more than 12 months if caused by a traumatic brain injury If a person is diagnosed as being in a permanent vegetative state, recovery is extremely unlikely but not impossible. Minimally conscious state A person who shows clear but minimal or inconsistent awareness is classified as being in a minimally conscious state. They may have periods where they can communicate or respond to commands, such as moving a finger when asked. A person may enter a minimally conscious state after being in a coma or vegetative state. In some cases a minimally conscious state is a stage on the route to recovery, but in others it's permanent. As with vegetative state, a continuing minimally conscious state means it has lasted longer than four weeks. However, it's more difficult to diagnose a permanent minimally conscious state because it depends on things such as: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is how responsive the person is In most cases, a minimally conscious state isn't usually considered to be permanent until it's lasted several years. Why they happen Disorders of consciousness can occur if the parts of the brain involved with consciousness are damaged. These types of brain injury can be divided into: traumatic brain injury \u2013 the result of a severe head injury, such as an injury sustained during a car accident or a fall from a great height non-traumatic brain injury \u2013 where the injury to the brain is caused by a health condition, such as a stroke progressive brain damage \u2013 where the brain is gradually damaged over time; for example, because of Alzheimer's disease Read more about the causes of disorders of consciousness. Making a diagnosis A disorder of consciousness will only be confirmed after extensive testing to determine the person's level of wakefulness and awareness. These examinations need to be carried out by someone experienced in disorders of consciousness, although the views of other healthcare professionals and family members should also be taken into consideration. For some states of impaired consciousness, such as vegetative state and minimally conscious state, there are recommended criteria to help confirm a diagnosis. Read more about diagnosing disorders of consciousness. Treatment and care Treatment can't ensure recovery from a state of impaired consciousness. Instead, supportive treatment is used to give the best chance of natural improvement. This can involve: providing nutrition through a feeding tube  making sure the person is moved regularly so they don't develop pressure ulcers gently exercising their joints to prevent them becoming tight keeping their skin clean managing their bowel and bladder \u2013 for example, using a tube known as a catheter to drain the bladder keeping their teeth and mouth clean offering opportunities for periods of meaningful activity \u2013 such as listening to music or watching television, being shown pictures or hearing family members talking Sensory stimulation In some cases, a treatment called sensory stimulation may be used in an attempt to increase responsiveness. This involves stimulating the main senses, such as vision, hearing and smell. It's usually carried out by a trained specialist, but family members are often encouraged to be involved. Some examples of sensory stimulation include: visual \u2013 showing photos of friends and family, or a favourite film hearing \u2013 talking or playing a favourite song smell \u2013 putting flowers in the room or spraying a favourite perfume touch \u2013 holding their hand or stroking their skin with different fabrics It's not entirely clear how effective sensory stimulation is, but it's sometimes considered worthwhile.  Recovery It's impossible to predict the chances of someone in a state of impaired consciousness improving. It largely depends on: the type of brain injury how severe the injury is the person's age how long they've been in the state for Some people improve gradually, whereas others stay in a state of impaired consciousness for years. Many people never recover consciousness. There are only isolated cases of people recovering consciousness after several years. The few people who do regain consciousness after this time often have severe disabilities caused by the damage to their brain. Withdrawing nutritional support If a person has been in a vegetative state for a minimum of 12 months, it may be recommended that nutritional support is withdrawn. This is because: there's almost no chance of a recovery by this point prolonging life would have no benefit for the person concerned prolonging treatment could offer false hope and cause unnecessary emotional distress for the friends and family of the person concerned The medical team will discuss the issue with family members, but the decision has to be referred to the courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland before any further action can be taken. In Scotland a court ruling isn't required, but is often sought. If the court agrees with the decision, a palliative care team will usually be involved in planning the withdrawal. Once nutritional support is eventually withdrawn, the person will die within a few days or weeks. Locked-in syndrome Locked-in syndrome has similar features to disorders of consciousness, but is considered and treated differently.  A person with locked-in syndrome is both conscious and aware, but completely paralysed and unable to speak. They're usually able to move their eyes and are sometimes able to communicate by blinking. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2015 Next review due: 23\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 82 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bereavement Coma End of life care End of life issues Severe head injury External links Headway UK: coma and reduced awareness states healthtalk.org: family experiences of vegetative and minimally conscious states National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS): coma information Bereavement Information and real stories about coping with different types of bereavement Coma Find out about comas, a state of unconsciousness where a person is unresponsive and cannot be woken up NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Personality disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/personality-disorder","content":"Personality disorder - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Personality disorder  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Personality-disorder Reuter's news Personality-disorder Clinical trials Personality disorder Personality-disorder Symptoms Personality-disorder Treatment Introduction  Personality disorders are conditions in which an individual differs significantly from an average person, in terms of how they think, perceive, feel or relate to others. Changes in how a person feels and distorted beliefs about other people can lead to odd behaviour, which can be distressing and may upset others. Common features include: being overwhelmed by negative feelings such as distress, anxiety, worthlessness or anger avoiding other people and feeling empty and emotionally disconnected difficulty managing negative feelings without self-harming (for example, abusing drugs and alcohol, or taking overdoses) or, in rare cases, threatening other people  odd behaviour difficulty maintaining stable and close relationships, especially with partners, children and professional carers  sometimes, periods of losing contact with reality Symptoms typically get worse with stress. People with personality disorders often experience other mental health problems, especially depression and substance misuse. When and why personality disorders occur Personality disorders typically emerge in adolescence and continue into adulthood. They may be mild, moderate or severe, and people may have periods of \"remission\" where they function well. Personality disorders may be associated with genetic and family factors. Experiences of distress or fear during childhood, such as neglect or abuse, are common. Types of personality disorder Several different types of personality disorder are recognised. They have been broadly grouped into one of three clusters \u2013 A, B or C \u2013 which are summarised below. Read about the symptoms of personality disorders for a full list of the main types and signs of personality disorders. Cluster A personality disorders A person with a cluster A personality disorder tends to have difficulty relating to others and usually shows patterns of behaviour most people would regard as odd and eccentric. Others may describe them as living in a fantasy world of their own. An example is paranoid personality disorder, where the person is extremely distrustful and suspicious. Cluster B personality disorders A person with a cluster B personality disorder struggles to regulate their feelings and often swings between positive and negative views of others. This can lead to patterns of behaviour others describe as dramatic, unpredictable and disturbing. An example is borderline personality disorder, where the person is emotionally unstable, has impulses to self-harm, and has intense and unstable relationships with others. Cluster C personality disorders A person with a cluster C personality disorder struggles with persistent and overwhelming feelings of fear and anxiety. They may show patterns of behaviour most people would regard as antisocial and withdrawn. An example is avoidant personality disorder, where the person appears painfully shy, socially inhibited, feels inadequate and is extremely sensitive to rejection. The person may want to be close to others, but lacks confidence to form a close relationship. How many people are affected? Personality disorders are common mental health problems. In England, it is estimated that around 1 in 20 people has a personality disorder. However, many people have only mild conditions so only need help at times of stress (such as bereavement). Other people with more severe problems may need specialist help for longer periods. Outlook Many people recover from personality disorders over time. Psychological or medical treatment is sometimes helpful; sometimes support is all that is needed. This depends on the severity of the disorder and whether there are ongoing problems. Some mild to moderate personality disorders improve with psychotherapy. Different types of psychological therapies have been shown to help people with personality disorders. However, there is no single approach that suits everyone and treatment should be tailored to the individual. Not all talking therapies are effective and it is essential they are delivered by a trained therapist. Read more information about treating a personality disorder. Video: attitudes to mental health Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Four people who've had mental health issues talk about the negative reactions they faced and how they overcame them. Media last reviewed: Next review due: How common are the different types of personality disorder? Mild personality disorders that do not seriously interfere with a person's ability to function socially are common. Severe disorders are rare and affect less than 2% of the population. In a survey of 8,000 people chosen at random in the UK, the most common personality disorders (PDs) were: obsessive compulsive PD \u2013 found in around 2% of people schizoid PD avoidant PD paranoid PD borderline PD  antisocial PD \u2013 found in less than 1% of people Some people with mild to moderate personality disorders seek treatment. People with more severe personality disorders, especially borderline and antisocial PD, may be more likely to come into contact with medical services due to the consequences of their behaviour, even though they are reluctant to seek treatment. This could be because they may not think there is anything wrong with them, or because they fear contact with health professionals. Page last reviewed: 21\/08\/2014 Next review due: 21\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 382 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Borderline personality disorder Antisocial personality disorder Carers Direct: mental health Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Psychotherapy Accessing therapy Mental health Video: personality change External links Mind: understanding personality disorders Personality disorder - personal stories Rethink Mental Illness: about personality disorders Royal College of Psychiatrists: personality disorders Mental health Get information about mental health problems, find out where to get help, and read other people's stories Mental health services Find out what mental health services exist and how to access them NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Antisocial personality disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/antisocial-personality-disorder","content":"Antisocial personality disorder - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Antisocial personality disorder  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Antisocial personality disorder Introduction  Personality disorders are mental health conditions that affect how someone thinks, perceives, feels or relates to others. Antisocial personality disorder is a particularly challenging type of personality disorder, characterised by impulsive, irresponsible and often criminal behaviour. Someone with antisocial personality disorder will typically be manipulative, deceitful and reckless, and won't care for other people's feelings. Like other types of personality disorder, antisocial personality disorder is on a spectrum, which means it can range in severity from occasional bad behaviour to repeatedly breaking the law and committing serious crimes. Psychopaths are considered to have a severe form of antisocial personality disorder. Signs of antisocial personality disorder A person with antisocial personality disorder may: exploit, manipulate or violate the rights of others lack concern, regret or remorse about other people's distress behave irresponsibly and show disregard for normal social behaviour have difficulty sustaining long-term relationships be unable to control their anger lack guilt, or not learn from their mistakes blame others for problems in their lives repeatedly break the law A person with antisocial personality disorder will have a history of conduct disorder during childhood, such as truancy (not going to school), delinquency \u2013 for example, committing crimes or substance misuse \u2013 and other disruptive and aggressive behaviours. Who develops antisocial personality disorder? Antisocial personality disorder affects more men than women. It's not known why some people develop antisocial personality disorder, but both genetics and traumatic childhood experiences, such as child abuse or neglect, are thought to play a role. A person with antisocial personality disorder will have often grown up in difficult family circumstances. One or both parents may misuse alcohol, and parental conflict and harsh, inconsistent parenting are common. As a result of these problems, social services may become involved with the child's care. These types of difficulties in childhood will often lead to behavioural problems during adolescence and adulthood. Effects of antisocial personality disorder Criminal behaviour is a key feature of antisocial personality disorder, and there's a high risk that someone with the disorder will commit crimes and be imprisoned at some point in their life. Men with antisocial personality disorder have been found to be three to five times more likely to misuse alcohol and drugs than those without the disorder, and have an increased risk of dying prematurely as a result of reckless behaviour or attempting suicide. People with antisocial personality disorder are also more likely to have relationship problems during adulthood and be unemployed and homeless. Diagnosing antisocial personality disorder To be diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, a person must have a history of conduct disorder before the age of 15. Antisocial personality disorder is diagnosed after rigorous psychological assessment. A diagnosis can only be made if the person is aged 18 years or older and at least three of the following criteria apply: repeatedly breaking the law repeatedly being deceitful being impulsive or incapable of planning ahead being irritable and aggressive having a reckless disregard for their safety or the safety of others being consistently irresponsible lack of remorse These signs must not be part of a schizophrenic or manic episode \u2013 they must be part of the person's everyday personality. This behaviour usually becomes most extreme and challenging during the late teens and early 20s. It may improve by the time the person reaches their 40s. Treating antisocial personality disorder In the past, antisocial personality disorder was thought to be a lifelong disorder, but that's not always the case and it can sometimes be managed and treated. Evidence suggests that behaviour can improve over time with therapy, even if core characteristics such as lack of empathy remain.  However, antisocial personality disorder is one of the most difficult types of personality disorders to treat. A person with antisocial personality disorder may also be reluctant to seek treatment and may only start therapy when ordered to do so by a court. The recommended treatment for someone with antisocial personality disorder will depend on their circumstances, taking into account factors such as age, offending history and whether there are any associated problems, such as alcohol or drug misuse. The person's family and friends will often play an active role in making decisions about their treatment and care. In some cases, substance misuse services and social care may also need to be involved. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has published guidelines about the management and prevention of antisocial personality disorder. Talking therapies Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is sometimes used to treat antisocial personality disorder. It's a talking therapy that aims to help a person manage their problems by changing the way they think and behave. Mentalisation-based therapy (MBT) is another type of talking therapy that's becoming more popular in the treatment of antisocial personality disorder. The therapist will encourage the person to consider the way they think and how their mental state affects their behaviour. Democratic therapeutic communities (DTC) Evidence suggests community-based programmes can be an effective long-term treatment method for people with antisocial personality disorder, and is becoming increasingly popular in prisons. DTC is a type of social therapy that aims to address the person's risk of offending, as well as their emotional and psychological needs. It's based around large and small therapy groups and focuses on community issues, creating an environment where both staff and prisoners contribute to the decisions of the community. There may also be opportunities for educational and vocational work. The recommended length of treatment is 18 months as there needs to be enough time for a person to make changes and put new skills into practice. Self-motivation is another important factor for acceptance on to this type of scheme. For example, the person must be willing to work as part of a community, participate in groups and be subject to the democratic process. The Ministry of Justice has more information about DTC in their guide Working with personality disordered offenders (PDF, 969kb). Medication There's little evidence to support the use of medication for treating antisocial personality disorder, although certain antipsychotic and antidepressant medications may be helpful in some instances. Carbamazepine and lithium may help control symptoms such as aggression and impulsive behaviour, and a class of antidepressant called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may improve anger and general personality disorder symptoms. About personality disorders Personality disorders affect how someone thinks, perceives, feels or relates to others. They range from mild to severe. The signs typically emerge in adolescence and persist into adulthood. People with personality disorders often have other mental health problems, particularly depression and substance misuse. Personality disorders may be associated with genetic and family factors, and experiences of distress or fear during childhood, such as neglect or abuse, are common. Although personality disorders may run in families, psychopathy is thought to have a higher genetic component. Treatment for personality disorders usually involves a course of psychological therapy. Page last reviewed: 09\/06\/2015 Next review due: 09\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 96 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Borderline personality disorder Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Personality disorder Psychotherapy External links NICE: antisocial personality disorder Help for domestic violence Where to get help and support if you're experiencing physical or emotional abuse or violence at home Care Programme Approach (CPA) The CPA sets out how services should help people with mental illness and complex needs Mental health services Find out what mental health services exist and how to access them NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Borderline personality disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/borderline-personality-disorder","content":"Borderline personality disorder - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Borderline personality disorder  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Borderline-personality-disorder Clinical trials Borderline personality disorder Borderline-personality-disorder Symptoms Borderline-personality-disorder Causes Borderline-personality-disorder Diagnosis Borderline-personality-disorder Treatment Introduction  Personality disorders are conditions that can cause a range of distressing symptoms and patterns of abnormal behaviour. This could include: overwhelming feelings of distress, anxiety, worthlessness or anger difficulty managing such feelings without self-harming \u2013 for example, by abusing drugs and alcohol or taking overdoses difficulty maintaining stable and close relationships sometimes having periods of loss of contact with reality in some cases, threats of harm to others Read more about the symptoms of borderline personality disorder. Personality disorders typically emerge in adolescence and persist into adulthood. They may be associated with genetic and family factors, and experiences of distress or fear during childhood, such as neglect or abuse, are common. Personality disorders range from mild to severe. What is borderline personality disorder (BPD)? It used to be thought that people with BPD were at the \"border\" between: neurosis \u2013 where a person is mentally distressed, but can still tell the difference between their perception and reality psychosis \u2013 where a person is unable to tell the difference between their perception and reality, and may experience delusions and hallucinations Now it's known that this is not an accurate description. BPD is best understood as a disorder of mood and how a person interacts with others. BPD is a common personality disorder seen by healthcare professionals. Although BPD is said to be more common in women, this is probably because it is recognised less frequently in men, who may be less likely to seek treatment. Read more about how BPD is diagnosed. How does BPD develop? The causes of BPD are unclear. However, as with most conditions, BPD appears to be due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Traumatic events that occur during childhood are associated with developing BPD. An estimated 8 out of 10 people with BPD experience parental neglect or physical, sexual or emotional abuse during their childhood. Read more about the causes of BPD. Outlook BPD can be a serious condition, and many people with the condition self-harm and attempt suicide. It is estimated that 60-70% of people with BPD will attempt suicide at some point in their life. However, for many with BPD, the outlook is reasonably good over time, and psychological or medical treatment may help. Treatment may involve a range of individual and group psychological therapies (psychotherapy) carried out by trained professionals working with a community mental health team. Effective treatment may last more than a year. Read more about treatments for BPD. Recent studies have suggested that the majority of those with BPD do well over time, with most experiencing sustained relief from symptoms, and around half being completely free of symptoms and able to function well. Additional treatment is recommended for people whose symptoms return. Mental and emotional health: talking therapies Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Learn about different talking therapies that can help people overcome a range of problems, from depression to stress. Tip: check with your GP whether there are any Improving Access to Psychological Treatment (IAPT) services in your area. Media last reviewed: 26\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 Associated mental health problems Many people with BPD also have another mental health or behavioural condition, such as: alcohol misuse generalised anxiety disorder bipolar disorder depression drug misuse an eating disorder \u2013 such as anorexia or bulimia another personality disorder \u2013 such as antisocial personality disorder Page last reviewed: 19\/08\/2014 Next review due: 19\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 378 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 91  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Personality disorder Mental health services Psychotherapy Self-harm Suicide Mental health Accessing therapy Video: self-harm External links Mind: understanding BPD NICE: BPD Rethink Mental Illness: personality disorders Personality disorders - personal stories One in four affected One in four of us will have mental health problems at some time in our lives. Find out how to get help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pertussis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/whooping-cough","content":"Whooping cough - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Whooping cough  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Whooping-cough Clinical trials Whooping cough   Whooping cough, also called pertussis, is a highly contagious bacterial infection of the lungs and airways. It causes repeated coughing bouts that can last for two to three months or more, and can make babies and young children in particular very ill. Whooping cough is spread in the droplets of the coughs or sneezes of someone with the infection. This page covers: Symptoms Who's at risk When to get medical advice Treatment Stopping the infection spreading Vaccinations Complications Symptoms of whooping cough The first symptoms of whooping cough are similar to those of a cold, such as a runny nose, red and watery eyes, a sore throat, and a slightly raised temperature. Intense coughing bouts start about a week later. The bouts usually last a few minutes at a time and tend to be more common at night. Coughing usually brings up thick mucus and may be followed by vomiting. Between coughs, you or your child may gasp for breath \u2013 this may cause a \"whoop\" sound, although not everyone has this. The strain of coughing can cause the face to become very red, and there may be some slight bleeding under the skin or in the eyes. Young children can sometimes briefly turn blue (cyanosis) if they have trouble breathing \u2013 this often looks worse than it is and their breathing should start again quickly. In very young babies, the cough may not be particularly noticeable, but there may be brief periods where they stop breathing. The bouts will eventually start to become less severe and less frequent over time, but it may be a few months before they stop completely. Who's at risk of whooping cough Whooping cough can affect people of any age, including: babies and young children \u2013 young babies under six months of age are at a particularly increased risk of complications of whooping cough older children and adults \u2013 it tends to be less serious in these cases, but can still be unpleasant and frustrating people who've had whooping cough before \u2013 you're not immune to whooping cough if you've had it before, although it tends to be less severe the second time around people vaccinated against whooping cough as a child \u2013 protection from the whooping cough vaccine tends to wear off after a few years You can get whooping cough if you come into close contact with someone with the infection. A person with whooping cough is infectious from about six days after they were infected \u2013 when they just have cold-like symptoms \u2013 until three weeks after the coughing bouts start. Antibiotic treatment can reduce the length of time someone is infectious. When to get medical advice See your GP or call NHS 111 if you or your child: have symptoms of whooping cough have had a cough for more than three weeks have a cough that is particularly severe or is getting worse Call 999 or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department if you or your child: have significant breathing difficulties, such as long periods of breathlessness or choking, shallow breathing, periods where breathing stops, or dusky, blue skin  develop signs of serious complications of whooping cough, such as fits (seizures) or pneumonia Treatment for whooping cough Treatment for whooping cough depends on your age and how long you've had the infection. Children under six months who are very ill and people with severe symptoms will usually be admitted to hospital for treatment. People diagnosed during the first three weeks of infection may be prescribed antibiotics to take at home \u2013 these will help stop the infection spreading to others, but may not reduce the symptoms. People who've had whooping cough for more than three weeks won't normally need any specific treatment, as they're no longer contagious and antibiotics are unlikely to help. While you're recovering at home, it can help to get plenty of rest, drink lots of fluids, clean away mucus and sick from your or your child's mouth, and take painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen for a fever. Avoid using cough medicines, as they're not suitable for young children and are unlikely to be of much help. Stopping the infection spreading If you or your child are taking antibiotics for whooping cough, you need to be careful not to spread the infection to others. Stay away from nursery, school or work until five days from the start of antibiotic treatment or three weeks after the coughing bouts started (whichever is sooner). Cover your or your child's mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing and sneezing. Dispose of used tissues immediately. Wash your and your child's hands regularly with soap and water. Other members of your household may also be given antibiotics and a dose of the whooping cough vaccine to stop them becoming infected. Vaccinations for whooping cough There are three routine vaccinations that can protect babies and children from whooping cough: the whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy \u2013 this can protect your baby during the first few weeks of life; the best time to have it is soon after the 20th week of your pregnancy the 5-in-1 vaccine \u2013 offered to babies at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age the 4-in-1 pre-school booster \u2013 offered to children by 3 years and 4 months These vaccines don't offer lifelong protection from whooping cough, but they can help stop children getting it when they're young and more vulnerable to the effects of the infection. Older children and adults aren't routinely vaccinated, except during pregnancy or a whooping cough outbreak. Complications of whooping cough Babies and young children under six months are usually most severely affected by whooping cough. They're at an increased risk of: dehydration breathing difficulties weight loss pneumonia \u2013 an infection of the lungs fits (seizures) kidney problems brain damage caused by a lack of oxygen reaching the brain death \u2013 although this is very rare Older children and adults tend to be less severely affected, although they may experience problems caused by repeated coughing, such as nosebleeds, bruised ribs or a hernia. Page last reviewed: 24\/05\/2016 Next review due: 24\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 467 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 224  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cough Does your child have a serious illness? Whooping cough vaccination in pregnancy Kids: coughs, colds and ear infections What to do when your child has a minor illness such as a cough, cold, sore throat or ear infection Whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy Pregnant women are advised to be vaccinated against whooping cough to protect their baby's health NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PET scan","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/PET-scan","content":"PET scan - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories PET scan  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview PET-scan Clinical trials PET scan Introduction  Positron emission tomography (PET) scans are used to produce detailed three-dimensional images of the inside of the body. The images can clearly show the part of the body being investigated, including any abnormal areas, and can highlight how well certain functions of the body are working. PET scans are often combined with computerised tomography (CT) scans to produce even more detailed images. This is known as a PET-CT scan. They may also occasionally be combined with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. This is known as a PET-MRI scan. Why PET scans are used An advantage of a PET scan is that it can show how well certain parts of your body are working, rather that showing what it looks like. They're particularly helpful for investigating confirmed cases of cancer, to determine how far the cancer has spread and how well it's responding to treatment. Sometimes PET scans are used to help plan operations, such as a coronary artery bypass graft or brain surgery for epilepsy. They can also help diagnose some conditions that affect the normal workings of the brain, such as dementia. How PET scans work PET scanners work by detecting the radiation given off by a substance called a radiotracer as it collects in different parts of your body. In most PET scans a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is used, which is similar to naturally occurring glucose (a type of sugar) so your body treats it in a similar way. By analysing the areas where the radiotracer does and doesn't build up, it's possible to work out how well certain body functions are working and identify any abnormalities. For example, a concentration of FDG in the body's tissues can help identify cancerous cells because cancer cells use glucose at a much faster rate than normal cells. What happens during a PET scan PET scans are usually carried out on an outpatient basis. This means you won't need to stay in hospital overnight. It's important to arrive on time for your scan, as the radiotracer used has a short shelf-life and your scan may be cancelled if you're late. Preparation Your appointment letter will mention anything you need to do to prepare for your scan. You will usually be advised not to eat anything for six hours beforehand. Drinking is allowed, but you should ideally just drink water. You should also avoid strenuous exercise for 24 hours before your appointment. It's a good idea to wear loose comfortable clothes, as you may be able to wear these during the scan (although sometimes you may be asked to change into a hospital gown). Try to avoid wearing jewellery and clothes containing metal (such as zips), as these will need to be removed. Radiotracer injection Before the scan, the radiotracer is injected into a vein in your arm or hand. You will need to wait quietly for about an hour, to give it time to be absorbed by the cells in your body. It's important to relax, keep as still as possible, and avoid talking while you wait, as moving and speaking can affect where the radiotracer goes in your body. You can go to the toilet if you need to at any point. The scan For the scan, you lie on a flat bed that will be moved into the centre of the large, circular scanner. You should stay still and not talk while the scanner takes pictures of your body, which usually takes up to 30 minutes. The scan is completely painless, but you may feel uncomfortable lying still for this long. If you feel unwell at any point there is a buzzer you can press to alert the medical team. The medical team will be able to see you throughout the scan. For some people, being inside the scanner can be an unpleasant experience. Inform the hospital before the day of the scan if you think this may be a problem for you. They may be able to arrange for you to have a sedative to help you relax during the scan. Afterwards You should not experience any side effects after a PET scan and should usually be able to go home soon afterwards. The results of your scan will not usually be available on the same day. They will be sent to your specialist to be discussed at your next appointment. Are there any risks? Any exposure to radiation carries a very small risk of potential tissue damage that could lead to cancer at a later date. However, in a standard PET scan the amount of radiation you're exposed to is small \u2013 about the same as the amount you get from natural sources, such as the sun, over three years. The radiotracer becomes quickly less radioactive over time and will usually be passed out of your body naturally within a few hours. Drinking plenty of fluid after the scan can help flush it from your body. As a precaution, you may be advised to avoid prolonged close contact with pregnant women, babies or young children for a few hours after a PET scan, as you will be slightly radioactive during this time. The CT component of a PET-CT scan also involves exposure to a small amount of additional radiation, but the risk of this causing any problems in the future is still very small. Page last reviewed: 11\/02\/2015 Next review due: 11\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 670 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 155  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer CT scan MRI scan Radiation External links Cancer Research UK: PET scan Outpatients and day patients Find out what happens on the day of your hospital outpatient appointment CT scan Find out why CT scans are used and read about what happens before, during and after the scan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Peyronie\u2019s disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/chq\/Pages\/875.aspx?CategoryID=61&SubCategoryID=616","content":"Is it normal to have a curved penis? - Health questions - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories You are here: Common health questions Men's health Your penis Is it normal to have a curved penis? Is it normal to have a curved penis? It\u2019s common for the penis to curve slightly to the left or right when it\u2019s erect. However, if you have a more significant bend in your penis, which may cause you pain or difficulty having sex, see your GP or go to your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. These can sometimes be symptoms of Peyronie\u2019s disease. What is Peyronie\u2019s disease? Peyronie's disease causes the penis to become curved when it\u2019s erect. The condition mostly affects men over 40, although it can happen at any age. What are the symptoms of Peyronie\u2019s disease? The symptoms of Peyronie\u2019s disease include: a thickened area or hard lump (plaque) in the shaft of the penis (it's rare to get more than one plaque)  a curve in the penis when it\u2019s erect (usually it curves upwards) pain in the penis, usually during an erection (pain in the non-erect penis is rare) the penis looking misshapen, like an hourglass loss of length or girth of the penis  Some men with the condition get pain in their penis, while others get none. If you do get pain, it may get better over time. However, in severe cases, the curve in the penis can make having sex difficult, painful or even impossible. Peyronie\u2019s disease may also lead to erectile dysfunction. What causes Peyronie\u2019s disease? The cause of Peyronie's disease is not yet understood. It\u2019s thought that the condition sometimes occurs after an injury to the penis when erect, such as being bent during sex. However, it can develop without any obvious cause. Peyronie's disease may run in families. Non-surgical treatments for Peyronie\u2019s disease Many men don\u2019t need treatment, as they don\u2019t have pain or the condition doesn\u2019t affect their sexual function. The condition can sometimes improve without treatment. Various non-surgical treatments are available, including medicines and injections of steroids into the affected area. However, there is limited evidence of their effectiveness. Guidance is available from the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) on one treatment option: extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT). This involves targeting soundwaves at the plaque, generally using an ultrasound scanner. The NICE guidance advises that, although ESWT is considered safe, there isn't enough evidence to prove it's effectiveness. Surgical treatments for Peyronie\u2019s disease In severe cases, it may be possible to treat Peyronie\u2019s disease with surgery. However, doctors recommend waiting at least 12 months before considering surgery, as the condition can improve in some men without treatment. Surgery may involve: removing or cutting away the plaque and attaching a patch of skin or a vein to straighten the penis removing an area of the penis opposite the plaque to cancel out the bend (this can lead to a slight shortening of the penis) implanting a device to straighten the penis What should I do if I\u2019m worried about my curved penis? If you\u2019re concerned about a lump or bend in your penis, or if it\u2019s causing problems with sex, go to your GP or a local GUM clinic.   Read the answers to more questions about men\u2019s health. Further information: Can I get my penis enlarged? What is this lump on my penis? Penis problems \u2013 a visual guide Erectile dysfunction (impotence) Ejaculation problems Penis health Boys\u2019 bodies Q&A Good sex Men\u2019s Health Forum: penis size FAQs   Page last reviewed: 27\/05\/2015 Next review due: 26\/05\/2017 More about: men's health Impotence Testicular cancer Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Male Health Forum Prostate disease blog Prostate Cancer UK NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phaeochromocytoma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phaeochromocytoma","content":"Phaeochromocytoma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phaeochromocytoma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview phaeochromocytoma Clinical trials Phaeochromocytoma Introduction  A phaeochromocytoma is a rare tumour of the adrenal glands, which sit above the kidneys. They are usually non-cancerous (benign), although around one in 10 are cancerous. Phaeochromocytomas can develop at any age, including in babies and children. How the adrenal glands are affected The adrenal glands produce a range of hormones that are vital for the normal working of the body. Most phaeochromocytomas develop at the centre of one or both of the adrenal glands, in a part called the adrenal medulla. The cells of the adrenal medulla make the 'fight or flight' hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline, and release these into the bloodstream when they are needed. These hormones control heart rate, metabolism and blood pressure. Phaeochromocytomas can cause the adrenal medulla to produce too much of these hormones, which often results in problems such as heart palpitations and high blood pressure. Signs and symptoms  The symptoms of a phaeochromocytoma tend to be unpredictable \u2013 often occurring in sudden attacks lasting from a few minutes to an hour. These attacks may become more frequent, longer and more severe as the tumour grows. Although not everyone has them, the three typical symptoms are: severe headaches sweating heart palpitations Other possible symptoms include: feeling irritable, nervous or anxious pale skin weight loss feeling tired and drowsy uncontrollable shaking or trembling (tremors) feeling sick shortness of breath a facial flushing sensation (although your skin may look grey during these attacks) feeling dizzy or faint when your stand up (postural or orthostatic hypotension) chest pain or abdominal (tummy) pain However, some people with phaeochromocytoma never develop symptoms, and their condition is never diagnosed or is only discovered during tests for another problem. Some people have symptoms for many years before phaeochromocytoma is diagnosed. What causes phaeochromocytomas? Most phaeochromocytomas occur for no obvious reason and without a family history of the condition \u2013 particularly those affecting adults. However, around one in every three or four occurs as part of an inherited genetic disorder, such as: multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) These conditions cause many tumours or growths to develop around the body \u2013 for example, people with multiple endocrine neoplasia often have tumours in their thyroid gland and parathyroid glands (tiny glands near the thyroid that regulate calcium levels). These conditions can be passed on to a child by their parents. They are passed on in what is known as an autosomal dominant pattern, which means only one parent needs to carry a gene responsible for one of these conditions to risk passing it on to their children. There are also other rare genetic causes of phaeochromocytoma. If you are diagnosed with a phaeochromocytoma, your doctor may recommend having genetic screening for some of these conditions. Read more about genetics and genetic testing. Diagnosing a phaeochromocytoma As the symptoms are unpredictable, it may be hard to capture the attacks when you see your GP. Try to describe what you experience in as much detail as you can. Keeping a diary of your symptoms may be helpful. Your GP may want to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms such as medication or panic attacks. Phaeochromocytoma is rare compared to other causes of similar symptoms. Your GP may arrange urine tests to measure your levels of normetadrenaline and metadrenaline (adrenaline and noradrenaline breakdown products), or may refer you to a specialist to organise blood or urine tests. If your hormone levels are significantly higher than normal, you will be referred to a specialist doctor who may arrange a computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of your adrenal glands, or other tests. If the scan shows a tumour on your adrenal glands, you'll probably be referred for surgery to have this removed. It\u2019s important not to do this surgery immediately, however, as some medication is required for a period of a few weeks to prepare the body for this operation. Treating a phaeochromocytoma Most people with a phaeochromocytoma will have it surgically removed. You'll usually be given medication called alpha blockers for several weeks before the operation to block the effects of the excess hormones on your body and stabilise your blood pressure and pulse ready for surgery. You may also be given a medication called beta blockers if your doctor thinks it necessary. The operation is carried out under general anaesthetic (where you are asleep) and may be done as: laparoscopic ('keyhole') surgery \u2013 where a number of small incisions (cuts) are made and fine instruments are passed through these to remove the tumour; this is the most common type of surgery for phaeochromocytomas open surgery \u2013 where a single, larger incision is made in the skin to access and remove the tumour The incisions will usually be made in your abdomen. Your doctor will discuss the best type of operation for you and explain the procedure to you in detail, including the risks, and will answer any questions you have. If your phaeochromocytoma is cancerous, you may also need chemotherapy or radiotherapy in addition to surgery. If your tumour cannot be removed, you will need medication to manage your condition \u2013 usually a combination of medicines to control the effects of the excessive hormones. Outlook Left untreated, phaeochromocytomas can cause severe problems and have a significant impact on your quality of life. The effects on your heart and blood pressure could lead to complications, some of which are life-threatening, such as an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), heart attacks, strokes and organ failure. However, the majority of tumours can be successfully removed during surgery and this will usually mean most of the symptoms disappear. The tumour may eventually return in some people who have it removed, so you'll need to attend regular follow-up appointments after surgery. Contact your GP straight away if your symptoms return. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/11\/2014 Next review due: 05\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 56 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Having surgery Heart palpitations High blood pressure Neurofibromatosis type 1 External links Pheochromocytoma support board Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy Heart palpitations Does your heart occasionally flutter or start pounding? Read about the common causes Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phantosmia (phantom smells)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phantosmia","content":"Phantosmia (smelling odours that aren't there) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phantosmia (smelling odours that aren't there)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phantosmia Introduction  'Phantosmia' is the medical term for an imaginary odour (phantom smell). It is also known as an \"olfactory hallucination\". The smell is unique to the person and is usually unpleasant, spoiling the taste of any food or drink consumed.It can be in one or both nostrils. Most phantom smells go away in time and are not caused by anything serious. But if the problem persists and you're worried, see your GP. How does your sense of smell work? When something gives off a smell, it means tiny molecules have evaporated from its surface and reached your nose. High up inside your nose is tissue containing specialised nerve cells, called olfactory sensory neurons, which connect directly to your brain. These nerve cells have receptors that detect the microscopic odour molecules and send electrical signals to the brain. The brain receives these signals and identifies the smell. There are two ways smells can reach the olfactory sensory neurons: By the 'front door' through the nostrils. By the 'back door' through the throat to the back of the nasal cavity. Chewing food releases odour molecules and when you swallow, the tongue pushes this air into the back of the nasal cavity (this is known as \"retro-nasal olfaction\"). What could cause phantom smells? There are a wide range of possible causes of phantosmia, which include: nasal infection \u2013 some people start to perceive a smell after they develop an infection that affects their nose or sinuses (read about sinusitis). The smell may become noticeable after a sudden change in airflow through their nose \u2013 for example, just after they've sneezed. It usually goes away when the infection clears nasal polyps, which are abnormal tissue growths that form inside the nasal passages and sinuses (read more about nasal polyps) migraine with aura \u2013 some people smell phantom odours just before or during a migraine (read more about migraines) dental problems smoking exposure to certain chemicals such as insecticides or solvents radiation for treatment of head and neck cancer Neurological (nervous system) conditions Less commonly, the cause of phantosmia is either nerve cells sending abnormal smell signals to the brain, or a problem with the brain itself. This may be the result of: a disease affecting the nervous system, such as epilepsy, Parkinson\u2019s disease or Alzheimer\u2019s disease a stroke a head injury cancer \u2013 usually a brain tumour or neuroblastoma (a rare cancer that may start in the olfactory nerve) The above links will take you to more information on these conditions.  How is it diagnosed? Your GP will want to know if the problem is definitely with your sense of smell, and not with your sense of taste (it's easy to confuse these). They will also want to determine whether the smell is perceived, as in phantosmia, or actually real \u2013 you might be giving off and detecting a body odour, for example. You'll have a head and neck examination, to see if there is any obvious problem such as something in your nasal passages. The GP will want to know if the smell transmits through one nostril or both. You may be referred to an ear, nose and throat specialist for further tests, which may include: a nasal endoscopy, where a fine, flexible tube with a tiny camera at the end is inserted up through your nose and images are viewed on a television screen (read more about an endoscopy) an MRI scan or CT scan of your brain and nasal cavities, to rule out tumours, infections or obstructions How is phantosmia treated? Some people with phantosmia will find that the smell gradually fades over a few months, and no treatment is needed. If it is caused by an illness such as sinusitis, it should go when you recover from the illness. Otherwise, if it persists, the following treatments may be tried: Rinsing out the nasal passages with saline solution, which may provide temporary relief for short periods of time. This may temporarily block the smell signals going to your brain, but you'll need to keep doing it. Nasal drops or spray \u2013 you may be prescribed oxymetazoline, which narrows blood vessels in the nose to help reduce nasal congestion, a spray containing an anaesthetic, which numbs the nerve cells, or a nasal steroid spray. Sedatives, antidepressants or anti-epileptic drugs, which may work for some people. You must always weigh up the benefits of these treatments with the possible side effects \u2013 speak to your doctor about this. Other smell disorders Parosmia is a distorted perception of smell to an odour that is in your environment \u2013 for example, a piece of fruit may smell like rotting flesh. Anosmia is complete loss of the sense of smell. Read more about anosmia. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/10\/2014 Next review due: 27\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 165 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Nasal polyps Anosmia (loss of smell) Anosmia (loss of sense of smell) Anosmia is usually caused by a nasal condition or brain injury, although an estimated 6,000 people in the UK are born with it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pharyngitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Sore-throat","content":"Sore throat - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Sore throat  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Sore-throat Clinical trials Sore throat   Sore throats are very common and usually nothing to worry about. They normally get better within a week. Most are caused by minor illnesses such as colds or flu and can be treated at home. This page covers: Treatments and remedies Causes of a sore throat When to get medical advice When to get emergency help Treatments for a sore throat The following measures can often help soothe a sore throat: take ibuprofen or paracetamol \u2013 paracetamol is better for children and for people who can't take ibuprofen (note that children under 16 should never take aspirin) drink plenty of cool or warm fluids, and avoid very hot drinks eat cool, soft foods avoid smoking and smoky places gargle with a homemade mouthwash of warm, salty water suck lozenges, hard sweets, ice cubes or ice lollies \u2013 but don't give young children anything small and hard to suck because of the risk of choking There are also products such as medicated lozenges and sprays sold in pharmacies that you may want to try. There isn't much scientific evidence to suggest they help, although some people find them worth using. Antibiotics aren't usually prescribed for a sore throat, even if it's caused by a bacterial infection, as they're unlikely to make you feel better any quicker and they can have unpleasant side effects. Causes of a sore throat The cause of a sore throat isn't always obvious. But in most cases it's a symptom of a viral or bacterial infection. Common causes A sore throat is often a symptom of: colds or flu \u2013 you may also have a blocked or runny nose, a cough, a high temperature (fever), a headache and general aches laryngitis (inflammation of the voice box) \u2013 you may also have a hoarse voice, a dry cough and a constant need to clear your throat tonsillitis (inflammation of the tonsils) \u2013 you may also have red or spotty tonsils, discomfort when swallowing and a fever strep throat (a bacterial throat infection) \u2013 you may also have swollen glands in your neck, discomfort when swallowing and tonsillitis glandular fever \u2013 you may also feel very tired and have a fever and swollen glands in your neck It may also be caused by something irritating your throat, such as smoke, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (where acid leaks up from the stomach) and allergies. Less common causes Less often, a sore throat can be a sign of: quinsy (a painful collection of pus at the back of the throat) \u2013 the pain may be severe and you may also have difficulty opening your mouth or difficulty swallowing epiglottitis (inflammation of the flap of tissue at the back of the throat) \u2013 the pain may be severe and you may have difficulty breathing and difficulty swallowing These conditions are more serious and should be seen by a doctor as soon as possible (see below). When to get medical advice You don't usually need to get medical advice if you have a sore throat. But it's a good idea to contact your GP or NHS 111 if: your symptoms are severe you have persistent symptoms that haven't started to improve after a week you experience severe sore throats frequently you have a weak immune system \u2013 for example, you have HIV, are having chemotherapy, or are taking medication that suppresses your immune system When to get emergency help Very rarely, a sore throat can be a sign of a serious problem. Visit your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance immediately if: your symptoms are severe or getting worse quickly you have difficulty breathing you're making a high-pitched sound as you breathe (called stridor) you have difficulty swallowing you start drooling Page last reviewed: 04\/07\/2016 Next review due: 04\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1073 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 494  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 269  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 161  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Common cold Epiglottitis Glandular fever Tonsillitis Cold or flu? Find out about symptoms of colds and flu and how to stop the viruses spreading How to prevent germs from spreading Cleaning and good hygiene tips to help reduce the number of germs in your home NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phenylketonuria","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Phenylketonuria","content":"Phenylketonuria - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phenylketonuria  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phenylketonuria Clinical trials Phenylketonuria Phenylketonuria Symptoms Phenylketonuria Causes Phenylketonuria Treatment Introduction  Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a rare genetic condition that's present from birth (congenital). The body is unable to break down a substance called phenylalanine (see below), which builds up in the blood and brain. High levels of phenylalanine can damage the brain. PKU is treated with a special low-protein diet, which reduces the levels of phenylalanine in the body and prevents brain damage. PKU doesn't usually cause any symptoms if treatment is started early. If PKU isn't treated, damage to the brain and nervous system can lead to: learning disabilities behavioural difficulties epilepsy  High levels of phenylalanine can also cause eczema.   Read more about the symptoms of phenylketonuria. Phenylalanine Phenylalanine is an amino acid (a \"building block\" of protein). The phenylalanine in your body comes from protein in your diet, particularly high-protein foods, such as: meat fish eggs cheese milk What happens? The body takes in phenylalanine from the digestion of protein in the gut. Once it's entered the body, phenylalanine is either used to make proteins or removed by an enzyme (protein) called phenylalanine hydroxylase. In people with PKU, phenylalanine hydroxylase doesn't work properly due to a genetic mutation (alteration in their DNA). As a result, phenylalanine levels in the blood and other tissues rise. Read more about the causes of phenylketonuria. Screening for PKU All babies born in the UK and other developed countries are routinely screened for high phenylalanine levels. This is done using the heel prick test and is carried out during the first week of a baby\u2019s life. During the test, a blood sample is taken from the baby\u2019s heel to test for a number of rare but serious conditions, including PKU. If phenylketonuria is picked up, further tests will be arranged to confirm the diagnosis. If the second test confirms high phenylalanine levels, your baby will be referred to a doctor who specialises in treating PKU. You'll also be referred to a dietician, who will advise you about changes that need to be made to your baby\u2019s diet. Treating PKU Without treatment early in life, most people with PKU will develop severe learning difficulties and will require care throughout their lives. The main treatment for PKU is a low-protein diet that completely avoids high-protein foods \u2013 such as meat, eggs and dairy products \u2013 and controls the intake of many other foods, such as potatoes and cereals. In addition, people with PKU must take an amino acid supplement to ensure they're getting all of the nutrients required for normal growth and good health. There are also a number of specially designed low-protein versions of popular products \u2013 such as flour, rice and pasta \u2013 specifically designed for people with PKU and related conditions to incorporate into their diets. Many of these are available on prescription. If a high phenylalanine level is confirmed, a baby will immediately be started on a low-protein diet and amino acid supplements. Phenylalanine levels in the blood are regularly monitored by collecting blood from a finger prick onto a special card and sending it to a laboratory. As long as a person with PKU sticks to a low-protein diet throughout childhood and their phenylalanine levels stay within certain limits, they'll remain well and their natural intelligence will be unaffected. Adults with PKU It's generally accepted that adults with PKU function best while on a low-protein diet. However, unlike in children, high phenylalanine levels aren't known to cause permanent brain damage in adults with PKU. For this reason, clinicians differ in opinion over whether it's strictly necessary for adults with phenylketonuria to continue with the low-protein diet for the rest of their life. Some adults with PKU find it difficult to follow the low-protein diet and return to a normal diet. As a result, some may find that they don't function as well \u2013 for example, they may lose concentration or have a slower reaction time. Others don't seem to have any problems and lead a normal life. Any adverse effects caused by coming off the low-protein diet can usually be reversed by going back on the diet. Anyone who attempts to come off the diet should be supported by their clinician and have a regular follow-up to monitor their condition for any complications that might arise. For women with PKU, it's essential that they return to a strict diet if they're considering becoming pregnant, because high phenylalanine levels can harm an unborn child. Read more about treating phenylketonuria. Regular blood tests A child with phenylketonuria will need regular blood tests to measure levels of phenylalanine in their blood and assess how well they're responding to treatment. Only a drop of blood is needed, and it can be collected at home and sent to the hospital by post. It's recommended that children who are: six months of age or younger should have their blood tested once a week between six months and four years of age should have their blood tested once every two weeks over four years of age (and all adults) should have their blood tested once a month Someone with PKU will usually need to have regular blood tests throughout their life. You may be able to have training so that you can carry out your child\u2019s blood tests, or be able to test yourself if you have PKU. This will make testing more convenient.  Information about you If you or your child has PKU, your clinical team will pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. All newborn babies have a blood test to check for PKU  How common is phenylketonuria? Phenylketonuria (PKU) is rare. It's estimated to affect 1 in every 10,000 babies born in the UK. Both sexes are affected equally by PKU. The condition is slightly more common in white people, particularly those of Celtic descent (Scottish, Irish and Welsh). It's very rare in black and Japanese people. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2014 Next review due: 02\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 205 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood tests Newborn blood spot test Pregnancy and baby guide External links Lab Tests Online UK: PKU NSPKU: Society for Phenylketonuria British Inherited Metabolic Diseases Group Children Living with Inherited Metabolic Diseases (CLIMB) NHS Screening leaflet for parents: Phenylketonuria is suspected Newborn screening Find out which screening tests your newborn will be offered, including the blood spot (heel prick) test and hearing test NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phimosis (tight foreskin)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/phimosis","content":"Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Tight foreskin (phimosis and paraphimosis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phimosis and paraphimosis (tight foreskin) Introduction  Phimosis is a condition where the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis (glans). Phimosis is normal in babies and toddlers, but in older children it may be the result of a skin condition that has caused scarring. It isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms. Immediate treatment is needed in cases where phimosis causes problems such as difficulty urinating. Normal development Most uncircumcised baby boys have a foreskin that won't pull back (retract) because it's still attached to the glans. This is perfectly normal for about the first two to six years. By around the age of two, the foreskin should start to separate naturally from the glans. The foreskin of some boys can take longer to separate, but this doesn't mean there's a problem \u2013 it will just detach at a later stage. Never try to force your child's foreskin back before it's ready because it may be painful and damage the foreskin. When phimosis is a problem Phimosis isn't usually a problem unless it causes symptoms such as redness, soreness or swelling. If your child's glans is sore and inflamed they may have balanitis (inflammation of the head of the penis). There may also be a thick discharge underneath the foreskin. If both the glans and foreskin are inflamed it's known as balanoposthitis. Take your child to see your GP if they have these type of symptoms. Your GP will be able to recommend appropriate treatment. Most cases of balanitis can be easily managed using a combination of good hygiene, creams or ointments, and avoiding substances that irritate the penis. Read more about treating balanitis. Balanoposthitis can also sometimes be treated by following simple hygiene measures, such as keeping the penis clean by regularly washing it with water and a mild soap or moisturiser. Urine can irritate the glans if it's retained for long periods under the foreskin, so if possible you should withdraw the foreskin to wash the glans. If balanoposthitis is caused by a fungal or bacterial infection, an antifungal cream or a course of antibiotics may be needed. In adults, phimosis can occasionally be associated with sexually transmitted infections (STIs). It can also be caused by a number of different skin conditions including: eczema \u2013 a long-term condition that causes the skin to become itchy, red, dry and cracked psoriasis \u2013 a skin condition that causes red, flaky, crusty patches of skin covered with silvery scales lichen planus \u2013 a non-infectious itchy rash that can affect many areas of the body lichen sclerosus \u2013 a scarring condition of the foreskin (and sometimes glans) that's probably caused by urinary irritation in susceptible men and boys Topical steroids (a cream, gel or ointment that contains corticosteroids) are sometimes prescribed to treat a tight foreskin. They can help soften the skin of the foreskin, making it easier to retract. Phimosis can cause pain, skin splitting, or a lack of sensation during sex. Using a condom and lubricants while having sex may make your penis more comfortable. When surgery may be needed Surgery may be needed if a child or adult has severe or persistent balanitis or balanoposthitis that causes their foreskin to be painfully tight. Circumcision (surgically removing part or all of the foreskin) may be considered if other treatments have failed, but it carries risks such as bleeding and infection. Therefore, it's usually only recommended as a last resort, although it can sometimes be the best and only treatment option.  Alternatively, surgery to release the adhesions (areas where the foreskin is stuck to the glans) may be possible. This will preserve the foreskin but may not always prevent the problem recurring. Paraphimosis Paraphimosis is where the foreskin can't be returned to its original position after being retracted. It causes the glans to become painful and swollen and requires emergency medical treatment to avoid serious complications, such as increased pain, swelling and restricted blood flow to the penis. It may be possible to reduce the pain and inflammation by applying a local anaesthetic gel to the penis and pressing on the glans while pushing the foreskin forward. In difficult cases, it may be necessary to make a small slit in the foreskin to help relieve the pressure. In severe cases of paraphimosis, circumcision may be recommended. In very severe cases, a lack of blood flow to the penis can cause tissue death (gangrene) and surgical removal of the penis may be necessary. Penis hygiene It's important to clean your penis regularly to avoid problems developing. You should: gently wash your penis with warm water each day while having a bath or showering gently pull back your foreskin (if you have one) and wash underneath; don't pull back the foreskin of a baby or young boy because it could be painful and cause harm use a mild or non-perfumed soap (if you choose to use soap) to reduce the risk of skin irritation avoid using talc and deodorants on your penis because they may cause irritation Circumcised men should also regularly clean their penis with warm water and a mild soap (if you choose to use soap). Read more about how to wash a penis. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2015 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 342 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the sore penis information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/sore_penis_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Balanitis Circumcision Penis health Why is my penis smelly and sore? External links BAUS: penis procedures BAUS: tight foreskin Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Men's health 18-39 Health for men aged 18 to 39, including eating well, exercise, how to lose the gut and secrets of a sex doctor Men's health 40-60 Health and fitness tips for men aged 40 to 60, including dealing with a midlife crisis and how to lose weight Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phlebitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Phlebitis","content":"Phlebitis (superficial thrombophlebitis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phlebitis (superficial thrombophlebitis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phlebitis   Phlebitis literally means 'inflammation of a vein'. The vein becomes inflamed because there is blood clotting inside it or the vein walls are damaged. Superficial thrombophlebitis is the term for an inflamed vein near the surface of the skin (usually a varicose vein), caused by a blood clot. What are the symptoms? Superficial thrombophlebitis results in painful, hard lumps underneath the skin and redness of the overlying skin. This is usually on the lower leg, although it can occasionally affect surface veins in the arms, penis or breast. Is it serious? Superficial thrombophlebitis is typically more annoying than serious.  Usually, the blood clot clears and the inflammation dies down within a few weeks. Most people with superficial thrombophlebitis are otherwise well. There shouldn't be any foul discharge or abscess, and it's normally just lumps under the skin rather than swelling of the whole calf. This may be painful, but it shouldn't prevent you walking reasonably well. Who is most at risk? You're more at risk of superficial thrombophlebitis if you: have varicose veins smoke are very overweight take the contraceptive Pill or HRT (although these only slightly increase your risk of blood clots) are pregnant have had a previous blood clot or other problem with the vein have recently had injections or a drip put into the vein  have a condition that causes the blood to clot more easily, such as thrombophilia, polyarteritis (inflammation of the smaller arteries) or polycythaemia (a high concentration of red blood cells in your blood) have cancer How is it treated? Phlebitis is inflammation, not infection, so antibiotics aren't helpful. You can follow this advice to help reduce any pain and swelling: raise the leg to help reduce swelling wear compression stockings to help reduce swelling keep active, to keep the blood circulating press a cold flannel over the vein to ease any pain take anti-inflammatory painkillers (aspirin is best) to ease any pain rub an anti-inflammatory cream or gel on the area if the affected area is only small What's the outlook? When the inflammation settles, you may be left with darkened skin and the lump may take three or four months to go. But most people make a full recovery. If the thrombophlebitis occurred in a varicose vein, it is likely that the varicose veins will keep coming back, possibly with further episodes of thrombophlebitis. This is because there's a basic problem with the vein, and you may need this removing. Read about the treatment of varicose veins. Risk of DVT There's a small chance of the blood clot travelling along the vein to where it meets a deeper vein, and a DVT developing. This is more likely if the surface clot extends into the upper thigh or groin, or behind the knee (in places where superficial veins meet deeper veins). It is also more likely to occur if the affected vein is a normal vein, rather than a varicose vein, if you have had a DVT before, or if you are immobile. A DVT can cause pain, swelling and a heavy ache in your leg \u2013 see your GP immediately if you experience these symptoms. Read more about DVTs. Varicose veins: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Varicose veins are swollen veins that are usually dark blue or purple. This animation explains what causes varicose veins, the symptoms and treatment options. Media last reviewed: 09\/07\/2015 Next review due: 09\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 27\/05\/2016 Next review due: 27\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 34 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Varicose veins External links British Vein Institute: investigating varicose veins Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phobias","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Phobias","content":"Phobias - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phobias  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phobias Real stories Phobias Clinical trials Phobias Phobias Symptoms Phobias Causes Phobias Treatment Phobias Self-help Introduction  A phobia is an overwhelming and debilitating fear of an object, place, situation, feeling or animal. Phobias are more pronounced than fears. They develop when a person has an exaggerated or unrealistic sense of danger about a situation or object. If a phobia becomes very severe, a person may organise their life around avoiding the thing that's causing them anxiety. As well as restricting their day-to-day life, it can also cause a lot of distress. Anxiety disorder A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder. You may not experience any symptoms until you come into contact with the source of your phobia. However, in some cases, even thinking about the source of a phobia can make a person feel anxious or panicky. This is known as anticipatory anxiety. Symptoms may include: unsteadiness, dizziness and lightheadedness nausea sweating increased heart rate or palpitations shortness of breath trembling or shaking an upset stomach If you don't come into contact with the source of your phobia very often, it may not affect your everyday life. However, if you have a complex phobia such as agoraphobia (see below), leading a normal life may be very difficult. Read more about the symptoms of phobias. Types of phobia There are a wide variety of objects or situations that someone could develop a phobia about. However, phobias can be divided into two main categories: specific or simple phobias complex phobias The two categories are discussed below. Specific or simple phobias Specific or simple phobias centre around a particular object, animal, situation or activity. They often develop during childhood or adolescence and may become less severe as you get older. Common examples of simple phobias include: animal phobias \u2013 such as dogs, spiders, snakes or rodents environmental phobias \u2013 such as heights, deep water and germs situational phobias \u2013 such as visiting the dentist or flying bodily phobias \u2013 such as blood, vomit or having injections sexual phobias \u2013 such as performance anxiety or the fear of getting a sexually transmitted infection  Complex phobias Complex phobias tend to be more disabling than simple phobias. They tend to develop during adulthood and are often associated with a deep-rooted fear or anxiety about a particular situation or circumstance. The two most common complex phobias are: agoraphobia social phobia  Agoraphobia is often thought of as a fear of open spaces, but it's much more complex than this. Someone with agoraphobia will feel anxious about being in a place or situation where escaping may be difficult if they have a panic attack. The anxiety usually results in the person avoiding situations such as: being alone being in crowded places, such as busy restaurants or supermarkets  travelling on public transport Social phobia, also known as social anxiety disorder, centres around feeling anxious in social situations. If you have a social phobia, you might be afraid of speaking in front of people for fear of embarrassing yourself and being humiliated in public. In severe cases, this can become debilitating and may prevent you from carrying out everyday activities, such as eating out or meeting friends. What causes phobias? Phobias don't have a single cause, but there are a number of associated factors. For example: a phobia may be associated with a particular incident or trauma a phobia may be a learned response that a person develops early in life from a parent or sibling (brother or sister) genetics may play a role \u2013 there's evidence to suggest that some people are born with a tendency to be more anxious than others Read more about the causes of phobias. Diagnosing phobias Phobias aren't usually formally diagnosed. Most people with a phobia are fully aware of the problem. A person will sometimes choose to live with a phobia, taking great care to avoid the object or situation they're afraid of. However, if you have a phobia, continually trying to avoid what you're afraid of will make the situation worse. If you have a phobia, you should seek help from your GP. They may refer you to a specialist with expertise in behavioural therapy, such as a psychologist. Treating phobias Almost all phobias can be successfully treated and cured. Simple phobias can be treated through gradual exposure to the object, animal, place or situation that causes fear and anxiety. This is known as desensitisation or self-exposure therapy. You could try these methods with the help of a professional or as part of a self-help programme. Treating complex phobias often takes longer and involves talking therapies, such as: counselling psychotherapy cognitive behavioural therapy Medication isn't usually used to treat phobias. However, it's sometimes prescribed to help people cope with the effects of anxiety. Medications that may be used include: antidepressants tranquillisers beta-blockers Read more about how phobias are treated. How common are phobias? Phobias are the most common type of anxiety disorder. They can affect anyone, regardless of age, sex and social background. Some of the most common phobias include: arachnophobia \u2013 fear of spiders claustrophobia \u2013 fear of confined spaces agoraphobia \u2013 fear of open spaces and public places social phobia \u2013 fear of social situations Page last reviewed: 14\/01\/2016 Next review due: 14\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 136 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Agoraphobia Anxiety CBT Depression Panic disorder Social anxiety disorder External links Anxiety Alliance Mental health support at work Mind: phobias Moodjuice Triumph Over Phobia Getting help for phobias Whatever you have a phobia of, you don't have to live with your fear. Find out what you can do to overcome it Social anxiety disorder Social anxiety disorder, or social phobia, is a persistent and overwhelming fear of social situations, which may cause embarrassment Online mental health treatments Flexible and effective NHS-approved treatments for depression, anxiety and more Coping with fears and phobias Find out about common phobias, including how they start and the treatments available NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Agoraphobia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Agoraphobia","content":"Agoraphobia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Agoraphobia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Agoraphobia Real stories Agoraphobia Clinical trials Agoraphobia Agoraphobia Symptoms Agoraphobia Causes Agoraphobia Diagnosis Agoraphobia Treatment   Agoraphobia is a fear of being in situations where escape might be difficult or that help wouldn't be available if things go wrong. Many people assume agoraphobia is simply a fear of open spaces, but it's actually a more complex condition. Someone with agoraphobia may be scared of: travelling on public transport visiting a shopping centre leaving home If someone with agoraphobia finds themselves in a stressful situation, they'll usually experience the symptoms of a panic attack, such as: rapid heartbeat rapid breathing (hyperventilating) feeling hot and sweaty feeling sick They'll avoid situations that cause anxiety and may only leave the house with a friend or partner. They'll order groceries online rather than going to the supermarket. This change in behaviour is known as avoidance. Read more about the symptoms of agoraphobia. What causes agoraphobia? Agoraphobia usually develops as a complication of panic disorder, an anxiety disorder involving panic attacks and moments of intense fear. It can arise by associating panic attacks with the places or situations where they occurred and then avoiding them. A minority of people with agoraphobia have no history of panic attacks. In these cases, their fear may be related to issues like a fear of crime, terrorism, illness, or being in an accident. Traumatic events, such as bereavement, may contribute towards agoraphobia, as well as certain genes inherited from your parents. Read more about the possible causes of agoraphobia. Diagnosing agoraphobia Speak to your GP if you think you may be affected by agoraphobia. It should be possible to arrange a telephone consultation if you don't feel ready to visit your GP in person. Your GP will ask you to describe your symptoms, how often they occur, and in what situations. It's very important you tell them how you've been feeling and how your symptoms are affecting you. Your GP may ask you the following questions: Do you find leaving the house stressful? Are there certain places or situations you have to avoid? Do you have any avoidance strategies to help you cope with your symptoms, such as relying on others to shop for you? It can sometimes be difficult to talk about your feelings, emotions, and personal life, but try not to feel anxious or embarrassed. Your GP needs to know as much as possible about your symptoms to make the correct diagnosis and recommend the most appropriate treatment. Read more about diagnosing agoraphobia. Treating agoraphobia With psychological treatment (talking therapies), most people with agoraphobia will make significant improvements, particularly if the three steps described below are followed. A stepwise approach is usually recommended for treating agoraphobia and any underlying panic disorder: step one \u2013 educate yourself about your condition, possible lifestyle changes you can make, and self-help techniques to help relieve symptoms step two \u2013 enrol yourself on a guided self-help programme step three \u2013 more intensive treatments, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) or medication Lifestyle changes may include taking regular exercise, eating more healthily, and avoiding alcohol, drugs and drinks that contain caffeine, such as tea, coffee and cola. Self-help techniques that can help during a panic attack include staying where you are, focusing on something that's non-threatening and visible, and slow, deep breathing. If your agoraphobia fails to respond to these treatment methods, your GP may suggest trying a guided self-help programme. This involves working through self-help manuals that cover the types of issues you might be facing, along with practical advice about how to deal with them. Medication may be recommended if self-help techniques and lifestyle changes aren't effective in controlling your symptoms. You'll usually be prescribed a course of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are also used to treat anxiety and depression. In severe cases of agoraphobia, medication can be used in combination with other types of treatment, such as CBT and relaxation therapy. Read more about treating agoraphobia. Outlook Around a third of people with agoraphobia eventually achieve a complete cure and remain free from symptoms. Around half experience an improvement in symptoms, but they may have periods when their symptoms become more troublesome \u2013 for example, if they feel stressed. Despite treatment, about one in five people with agoraphobia continue to experience troublesome symptoms.  How common is agoraphobia? In the UK, up to 2 people in 100 have panic disorder. It's thought around a third will go on to develop agoraphobia. Agoraphobia is twice as common in women as men. It usually starts between the ages of 18 and 35. Page last reviewed: 20\/02\/2016 Next review due: 20\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 416 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 143  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anxiety CBT Depression Panic disorder Phobias Stress, anxiety and depression External links Anxiety Care UK: agoraphobia Anxiety UK: agoraphobia Phobias: blogs and stories Triumph Over Phobia (TOP UK) Moodzone Feeling stressed, anxious or depressed? NHS Choices Moodzone can help you on your way to feeling better Cognitive behavioural therapy Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of problem-solving therapy \u2013 find out more here Claire's story: 'I beat agoraphobia' How Claire Ledger, 26, overcame panic attacks caused by agoraphobia (fear of public spaces) NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Living with a phobia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/Phobias\/Pages\/Phobiashome.aspx","content":"Help for phobias - Stress, anxiety and depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stress, anxiety and depression Common problems I feel really down   I'm so stressed   I feel anxious and panicky   I feel angry often   I think I have the winter blues I'm worried someone is depressed   I'm worried my child might be depressed I think I'm having panic attacks Mood self-assessment What you can do now Low mood and depression How to feel happier Beating the winter blues Tips for coping with depression Exercise for depression Fear and phobias Anxiety in children Dealing with panic attacks Coping with fear Ten ways to fight your fears Getting help with phobias Stress Breathing exercise for stress Ten stress busters Beat stress at work Easy time-management tips Coping with exam stress Coping with money worries Anger management How to control your anger Expert tips on child anger Therapy and counselling Different types of therapy Benefits of talking therapy Find the right therapist Mental health helplines Self-help therapies Can I get free therapy or counselling? Depression support groups Five steps to wellbeing Learn about the five steps Mindfulness for mental wellbeing Connect for mental wellbeing Get active for mental wellbeing Give for mental wellbeing Learn for mental wellbeing Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Learn Life Skills: LLTTF Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides Real stories 'I beat agoraphobia' Read how Claire overcame agoraphobia with the help of group therapy 'I run to boost my mood' Running two or three times a week helps protect Liz from depression 'I used to hit my husband' An anger management course helped Florence end her violent behaviour towards her husband 'How I've learnt to deal with stress' Stress-reduction workshops taught Arvind how to control his stress levels 'I burned out from work stress' When Liz's doctor told her she had burned out from stress, she initially found it hard to believe Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Mental wellbeing audio guides Panic attacks Podcast with expert advice on how to tackle panic attacks. Anxiety and worry Podcast offering expert advice about worry and anxiety. Anxiety control Podcast explaining how you can take control of your anxiety. Unhelpful thinking Podcast to help you replace negativity with positive thinking. Depression Podcast on how to cope with low mood and depression. Low confidence Podcast providing tips to help you build your confidence. Sleep problems Podcast with expert tips on how to get a good night's sleep. Problem solving Podcast to help you make problems more manageable. Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel   Listen to all the Moodzone audio guides You are here: Health A-Z Stress, anxiety and depression Share: Save: Print: Getting help for phobias Many people with phobias resign themselves to living in fear, but this doesn't have to be the case as help is available. Treatments for every phobia are available through the NHS or other medical organisations. However, there are no quick fixes. There\u2019s no one way of coping with specific phobias that is guaranteed to work. Different strategies work for different people. Nicky Lidbetter, chief executive of Anxiety UK, says people are sometimes reluctant to see their doctor about a phobia, because they're embarrassed by it. \u201CThey may think they don\u2019t want to waste their GP\u2019s time with something as trivial as a phobia,\u201D she says. \u201CBut there really is nothing trivial about it.\u201D Your GP can refer you to your local primary care mental health team (PCMHT), which provides support and treatment for people with common mental health problems. The PCMHT brings together counsellors, social workers and psychologists. It can offer one-to-one consultations, where you will be given self-help material and some basic therapy. \u201CIt\u2019s important that people know these teams exist because they are a great resource,\u201D says Lidbetter. If you don\u2019t want to be seen by your GP, you can contact one of the organisations specialising in the treatment of phobias, such as Anxiety UK. They can help you find treatments that aren\u2019t available on the NHS. Getting help for phobias To cure certain phobias, treatment consists of some exposure to the things you are afraid of, in small manageable steps, to reduce your anxiety. Some phobia organisations offer clinical hypnotherapy, which isn\u2019t available on the NHS. \u201CYou\u2019re not hypnotised in the same way that you see on TV shows,\u201D says Lidbetter. \"You\u2019re put in a relaxed state of mind and asked to see yourself confronting your fear with confidence. \u201CIt can be useful for people whose anxiety is so acute that they\u2019re not yet ready for behaviour therapy,\u201D she adds. For people with severe specific phobias, the most effective treatment is likely to be cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT). CBT involves looking at your problems and working out ways of changing negative thoughts or behaviours. Therapists often set clients homework to do in between sessions, which may include carrying out activities such as monitoring thoughts and feelings throughout the week, and entering these into a thought diary. \u201CWith phobias, what you do in between the therapy sessions is as important as the sessions themselves,\u201D says Lidbetter. Tackling complex phobias With complex phobias, such as social phobia and agoraphobia, lifestyle habits may be aggravating anxiety symptoms. Tackling diet, fitness and sleep can help as much as therapy in treating the phobia. \"You need to tackle complex phobia from several fronts to get the maximum benefit,\u201D says Lidbetter. \u201CWhen they're anxious, people often eat or drink the wrong things, such as coffee, which can aggravate anxiety. It\u2019s also important to get enough sleep and take regular exercise.\u201D Lidbetter says that exercising uses up excess adrenaline, a hormone that causes your heart to beat faster, and can therefore worsen anxiety symptoms. With complex phobias it\u2019s important to get help as soon as possible. \"The longer you leave it untreated, the more entrenched it becomes,\" says Lidbetter. Again, CBT is recommended, but it doesn\u2019t work for everyone, and should be used as one of a combination of treatments. To speed up access to treatment, the Department of Health has approved computer-based CBT, for use at home or at a medical or community centre. FearFighter is a course of therapy delivered on the internet, available only through medical referral, for patients suffering from panic and phobias. There is also a range of internet packages that can be very useful for those not requiring intense treatment, but who would like to improve the management of their phobia and anxiety. Medication for phobias Medication is only recommended in the short term, as it's best to see if other techniques, such as talking therapy, will work. \u201CMedication is also worth trying in combination with other therapies, if simple self-help techniques and lifestyle changes prove to be ineffective,\u201D says Lidbetter. The three main types of medicine that are used to treat anxiety issues, including phobias, are antidepressants, tranquillisers and beta-blockers. Self-help groups are a good way of getting in touch with people with similar problems. They will be able to understand what you're going through and may be able to suggest helpful ways of coping. Members learn how to face up to fears together in a gradual, controlled way, so that eventually the anxiety should decrease. \"To have other people to help you along the way is really useful,\" says Lidbetter. \"People share coping strategies and techniques. To know there are others out there experiencing the same feelings is reassuring. \"It doesn\u2019t matter how many books you read, you don\u2019t get the experience of living with a phobia that you would get from speaking to a real person.\" For more information, visit our Health A-Z section on phobia treatments. Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2014 Next review due: 05\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Online mental health treatments Flexible and effective NHS-approved treatments for depression, anxiety and more Related articles Ten ways to fight your fears Low mood and depression Generalised anxiety disorder Panic disorder External links Anxiety UK CALM: Campaign Against Living Miserably No panic Triumph Over Phobia (TOP UK) Mind: phobias Services near you Find emotional support services in your area Find and compare services Services Anxiety Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Depression Depression self-help groups Mental health information and support Mental health support for young people Psychological therapies (IAPT) Stress Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Reading Well Books on Prescription Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Reading Well Books on Prescription is an early intervention service to help people understand and manage their mental health. The agency provides a core book list of accredited titles recommended by healthcare professionals that covers a range of common mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression, phobias and eating disorders. Media last reviewed: 11\/05\/2016 Next review due: 11\/05\/2019 Claire's story: 'I beat agoraphobia' How Claire Ledger, 26, overcame panic attacks caused by agoraphobia (fear of public spaces) Ten ways to fight your fears Whatever your fear is, these 10 tips can help you cope with your stress and anxiety Dealing with panic attacks Anxious? Dizzy? Heart racing? You could be having a panic attack. Get practical tips on how to cope Boost your mood with online therapy Living Life To The Full is a practical course to learn coping skills for when life gets on top of you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Panic attack","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/chq\/pages\/what-is-a-panic-attack.aspx?categoryid=139&subcategoryid=1393","content":"Are you having panic attacks? - Stress, anxiety and depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stress, anxiety and depression Common problems I feel really down   I'm so stressed   I feel anxious and panicky   I feel angry often   I think I have the winter blues I'm worried someone is depressed   I'm worried my child might be depressed I think I'm having panic attacks Mood self-assessment What you can do now Low mood and depression How to feel happier Beating the winter blues Tips for coping with depression Exercise for depression Fear and phobias Anxiety in children Dealing with panic attacks Coping with fear Ten ways to fight your fears Getting help with phobias Stress Breathing exercise for stress Ten stress busters Beat stress at work Easy time-management tips Coping with exam stress Coping with money worries Anger management How to control your anger Expert tips on child anger Therapy and counselling Different types of therapy Benefits of talking therapy Find the right therapist Mental health helplines Self-help therapies Can I get free therapy or counselling? Depression support groups Five steps to wellbeing Learn about the five steps Mindfulness for mental wellbeing Connect for mental wellbeing Get active for mental wellbeing Give for mental wellbeing Learn for mental wellbeing Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Learn Life Skills: LLTTF Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides Real stories 'I beat agoraphobia' Read how Claire overcame agoraphobia with the help of group therapy 'I run to boost my mood' Running two or three times a week helps protect Liz from depression 'I used to hit my husband' An anger management course helped Florence end her violent behaviour towards her husband 'How I've learnt to deal with stress' Stress-reduction workshops taught Arvind how to control his stress levels 'I burned out from work stress' When Liz's doctor told her she had burned out from stress, she initially found it hard to believe Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel Mental wellbeing audio guides Panic attacks Podcast with expert advice on how to tackle panic attacks. Anxiety and worry Podcast offering expert advice about worry and anxiety. Anxiety control Podcast explaining how you can take control of your anxiety. Unhelpful thinking Podcast to help you replace negativity with positive thinking. Depression Podcast on how to cope with low mood and depression. Low confidence Podcast providing tips to help you build your confidence. Sleep problems Podcast with expert tips on how to get a good night's sleep. Problem solving Podcast to help you make problems more manageable. Mood self-assessment Take this quick quiz, designed to guide you to useful resources that can help you better understand how you feel   Listen to all the Moodzone audio guides You are here: Health A-Z Stress, anxiety and depression Share: Save: Print: Are you having panic attacks? A panic attack is a rush of intense anxiety and physical symptoms. They can be frightening and happen suddenly, often for no clear reason. Signs of a panic attack You may experience: what feels like an irregular or racing heartbeat (palpitations) sweating  trembling shortness of breath (hyperventilation)  a choking sensation nausea  dizziness  tingling fingers ringing in your ears Some people think they are having a heart attack because it feels like their heart is beating fast or irregularly, or even that they are going to die. Panic attacks usually last somewhere from 5 to 20 minutes. Although it may feel like something is seriously wrong, they aren't dangerous and shouldn't harm you. You won\u2019t usually need to be admitted to hospital if you have had a panic attack. What causes panic attacks? The physical symptoms of a panic attack are caused by your body going into \"fight or flight\" mode. As your body tries to take in more oxygen, your breathing quickens. Your body also releases hormones, such as adrenaline, causing your heart to beat faster and your muscles to tense up. Having a panic attack now?  Try these tips for coping with panic attacks. You may also find that breathing exercises help. Should you see your doctor about panic attacks? A panic attack can make you feel like you\u2019re about to collapse or even die, but it's usually harmless. However, in some cases, you may need medical advice to rule out an underlying physical cause.    Get medical advice if: Your panic attack continues after doing 20 minutes of slow breathing. You still feel unwell after your breathing returns to normal. You still have a rapid or irregular heartbeat or chest pains after your panic attack.  You regularly have panic attacks, as this could be a sign that you have panic disorder. See what you can do to avoid future panic attacks. Moodzone: Panic attacks Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Dr Chris Williams describes the vicious circle that fuels panic attacks and explains how to tackle this. This podcast is one of an eight-part series for Moodzone. Media last reviewed: 02\/03\/2015 Next review due: 02\/03\/2017 Page last reviewed: 11\/12\/2015 Next review due: 11\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 502 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 261  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful NHS Choices links Anxiety in children Struggling with stress? Generalised anxiety disorder Panic disorder Other useful links Anxiety UK Big White Wall No panic Services near you Find emotional support services in your area Find and compare services Services Anxiety Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Depression Depression self-help groups Mental Health - Adults of all ages Mental health conditions Mental health information and support Psychological therapies (IAPT) Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Heart attack A heart attack occurs when part of the heart muscle dies because it has been starved of oxygen Help and support for young people Mental health hub for young people with advice on depression, anxiety, self-harm, stress, bullying and eating disorders Boost your mood with online therapy Living Life To The Full is a practical course to learn coping skills for when life gets on top of you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phonophobia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/hyperacusis","content":"Hyperacusis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Hyperacusis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview hyperacusis Clinical trials Hyperacusis Introduction  Hyperacusis is the name for intolerance to everyday sounds that causes significant distress and affects a person's day-to-day activities. The condition can vary quite a lot. For example, some people find loud noises extremely uncomfortable, some find certain noises particularly annoying, some develop a fear of certain noises, while others experience pain when hearing ordinary sounds. Hyperacusis affects people of all ages and is quite common in children. The condition may just be a minor nuisance for some, but for many it can have a major impact on their life. This page covers: Symptoms of hyperacusis When to get medical help Treatments for hyperacusis Causes of hyperacusis Symptoms of hyperacusis Hyperacusis can either start suddenly or develop gradually over time. When someone with the condition hears noise, they may: feel uncomfortable cover their ears or try to get away from the noise feel angry, tense, distressed, or anxious experience pain \u2013 hyperacusis can be very painful for some people Some people become afraid of sound and avoid noisy situations, causing them to become socially isolated. School and work life can also suffer as it can be very difficult to concentrate. When to get medical help Visit your GP if you have a severe sound intolerance. They can examine your ears and refer you to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) consultant or a hearing specialist (audiologist) for tests if necessary. There are no tests that can definitively diagnose hyperacusis, but you may be asked to fill in a questionnaire about your symptoms and have a hearing test to determine what level of sound causes a reaction. Treatments for hyperacusis There are no specific medicines or operations that can treat hyperacusis, although treating any underlying cause may help resolve the problem. If there's no clear cause, specialist techniques to help reduce your sensitivity to noise may be recommended. These therapies are widely available privately, and may be available on the NHS for people with severe or persistent hyperacusis. They should only be carried out by someone specially trained in the correct techniques. Treatment may involve: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 this aims to help you explore and change the way you think about the troublesome noises to reduce distress, change your avoidance behaviour, and help you recover from your hyperacusis symptoms   counselling and education \u2013 to support you and help you learn more about your hyperacusis sound therapy (desensitisation) \u2013 this aims to help desensitise your hearing over several months, using special noise generators either placed in the room or in your ears (similar to hearing aids) lifestyle changes \u2013 including learning relaxation techniques, listening to calming music or sounds, not avoiding noisy situations, and not using earplugs or muffs (these may make your ears more sensitive) Recent research suggests patients often feel CBT, counselling and education are the most effective treatments. Some people also found sound therapy helpful, but it wasn't clear whether it provided any additional benefit. You may also find it helpful to get in touch with a support group, such as the British Tinnitus Association and Action on Hearing Loss, to talk to other people with hyperacusis and share your experiences. Causes of hyperacusis The cause of hyperacusis is unclear. It has been linked with a number of other conditions, although many people with hyperacusis don't have any other obvious problems. Hyperacusis has been associated with: tinnitus \u2013 hearing sounds that come from inside your body, rather than from an outside source hearing loss \u2013 the brain may sometimes compensate for reduced hearing by amplifying signals coming from the ears damage to the ear or brain \u2013 including from a head injury, ear surgery, exposure to loud noise, earwax removal, glue ear, and persistent ear infections migraines Bell's palsy \u2013 a type of facial paralysis Ménière's disease \u2013 a disorder of the inner ear that causes a spinning sensation (vertigo), tinnitus, and hearing loss depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Addison's disease \u2013 a rare disorder of the adrenal glands, which sit near the kidneys and produce important hormones disorders affecting the brain \u2013 such as Williams' syndrome or autism spectrum disorder Hyperacusis can also be a side effect of certain medications. If you're taking any medication, check the leaflet it comes with to see if hyperacusis is listed as a possible side effect. Page last reviewed: 07\/03\/2016 Next review due: 07\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 330 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 182  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hearing problems Tinnitus Find audiology services External links British Tinnitus Association: hyperacusis Action on Hearing Loss: hyperacusis (PDF, 180kb) Hyperacusis Research Protect your ears Loud music at events can cause lasting damage to your hearing. Find out how to avoid an ear bashing Get your hearing tested If you're worried about your hearing, it's easy to get it checked. Read our guide to hearing tests Find audiology services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Phosphate test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Phosphate-test","content":"Phosphate test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Phosphate test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Phosphate test Introduction  A phosphate test is used to measure the level of phosphate in the blood. Phosphate is a chemical that contains the mineral phosphorus. Phosphate tests are very useful for measuring phosphate levels in malnourished people (where their diet doesn't contain the right amount of nutrients to meet their body's demands). A phosphate test can also be used to check for a condition called ketoacidosis, which sometimes affects people with diabetes. If you have ketoacidosis, your body can't use blood glucose as an energy source because of a lack of insulin (a hormone that controls blood sugar levels). Phosphate tests can also be used to help diagnose digestive system disorders that interfere with the absorption of phosphate, calcium and magnesium. Read more about the phosphate test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 18 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease Diabetic ketoacidosis External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Photodynamic therapy (PDT)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy","content":"Photodynamic therapy (PDT) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Photodynamic therapy (PDT)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy Clinical trials Photodynamic therapy photodynamic-therapy-NGPDT-sonodynamic-therapy Next-generation PDT and sonodynamic therapy Introduction  Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a treatment that involves the use of a light-sensitive medication and a light source to destroy abnormal cells. It can be used to treat some skin and eye conditions, as well as certain types of cancer. On their own, the medication and light source are harmless, but when the medication is exposed to the light, it activates and causes a reaction that damages nearby cells. This allows small abnormal areas of tissue to be treated without the need for surgery. Uses of PDT PDT can be used to treat abnormalities in parts of the body a light source can most easily reach, such as the skin, eyes, mouth, oesophagus (gullet) and lungs. Conditions sometimes treated with PDT include: actinic keratoses \u2013 dry scaly patches of skin caused by damage from years of sun exposure that could become cancerous if not treated Bowen's disease \u2013 a very early form of skin cancer basal cell carcinoma \u2013 a type of skin cancer macular degeneration \u2013 an eye condition that can lead to vision loss Barrett's oesophagus \u2013 changes in the cells in the lining of your lower oesophagus that could become cancerous if not treated oesophageal cancer, mouth cancer and lung cancer \u2013 PDT can cure some cancers if used in the early stages, or offer relief from symptoms in more advanced cases PDT also shows promise in treating some other types of cancer, as well as conditions such as warts and acne. Despite the claims relating to unproven \u201Calternative\u201D forms of PDT, such as next-generation PDT and sonodynamic therapy, PDT is not effective at treating widespread conditions or those affecting deeper parts of the body where a light source cannot reach. In these cases, surgery, radiotherapy, and\/or chemotherapy may be recommended instead. What happens PDT is carried out in two stages. First, you will need to come into the hospital or clinic to be given the light-sensitive medication. Depending on the area of the body being treated, this can be a cream, injection or special drink. Once the medication has been applied or given, you may be asked to go home and return in a few hours or days. This will give the medication a chance to build-up in the abnormal or cancerous cells that are going to be treated. Later, you will need to return to the hospital or clinic for the light treatment. This will involve a lamp or laser being shone onto the treatment area for around 10-45 minutes. To treat abnormal cells inside your body, such as in your lungs, an endoscope (flexible tube) will be passed into your body to deliver the light. After treatment You will usually be able to go home the same day you have the light treatment. If your skin was treated, it will be covered by a dressing that will need to remain in place for at least two days. You should try to avoid scratching or knocking the treated area, and keep it as dry as possible. Once you are advised to remove the dressing, you should be able to wash and bathe as normal, although you should make sure you pat the treated area dry gently. A follow-up appointment at the hospital or clinic will be arranged to assess whether the treatment has been effective and decide if it needs to be repeated. It will usually take around two to six weeks for the area to heal completely. Risks and side effects PDT is generally a very safe treatment. However, it\u2019s common to experience a burning or stinging sensation while the light treatment is being carried out. This will usually pass soon after the treatment finishes. PDT can also make your skin or eyes sensitive to light for up to six weeks, even if the area treated was inside your body. This means they may become red and sore when exposed to direct sunlight or bright indoor lights. Your treatment team will advise you about things you should do to protect your eyes and skin. Other potential side effects will depend on the area treated. For example, if your skin is treated, it may crust over, and become temporarily red, swollen or blistered after treatment. Your skin may also become slightly darker or lighter than it was before and there may be some hair loss. This is usually temporary, but it can sometimes be permanent. Treatment of the mouth, oesophagus and lungs can cause temporary coughing, difficulty swallowing, painful breathing, or breathlessness. If your eyes are treated, there is a small risk of permanent vision loss. Make sure you talk to your doctors about the possible risks and benefits of PDT before you agree to treatment. Next-generation PDT (NGPDT) and sonodynamic therapy (SDT) PDT as described above is an effective and licensed treatment for a number of conditions. It should not be confused with the unproven, unlicensed versions sold by some private clinics in the UK and overseas. Clinics promoting these so-called \"advanced\" versions of PDT, called \"next-generation PDT\" (NGPDT) and \"sonodynamic therapy\" (SDT) claim they can treat deep or widespread cancers, but these claims aren't supported by scientific evidence and these treatments aren't recommended. Read more about NGPDT and SDT. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/12\/2014 Next review due: 16\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 49 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer Living with cancer Risks of treatment abroad Healthy skin Find cancer information and support External links British Medical Laser Association: NGPDT and SDT Action for Sick Children Cancer Research UK: PDT Macmillan Cancer Support: PDT Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer The risks of treatment abroad There are many issues to consider before having surgery or dental treatment abroad NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Physiotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Physiotherapy","content":"Physiotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Physiotherapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Physiotherapy Clinical trials Physiotherapy Physiotherapy Techniques Physiotherapy Accessing physiotherapy Introduction  Physiotherapy helps to restore movement and function when someone is affected by injury, illness or disability. It can also help to reduce your risk of injury or illness in the future. It takes a holistic approach that involves the patient directly in their own care. When is physiotherapy used? Physiotherapy can be helpful for people of all ages with a wide range of health conditions, including problems affecting the: bones, joints and soft tissue \u2013 such as back pain, neck pain, shoulder pain and sports injuries brain or nervous system \u2013 such as movement problems resulting from a stroke, multiple sclerosis (MS) or Parkinson's disease heart and circulation \u2013 such as rehabilitation after a heart attack lungs and breathing \u2013 such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis Physiotherapy can improve your physical activity while helping you to prevent further injuries. Physiotherapists Physiotherapy is provided by specially-trained and regulated practitioners called physiotherapists. Physiotherapists often work as part of a multi-disciplinary team in various areas of medicine and settings, including: hospitals community health centres or clinics some GP surgeries some sports teams, clubs, charities and workplaces Some physiotherapists can also offer home visits. What physiotherapists do Physiotherapists consider the body as a whole, rather than just focusing on the individual aspects of an injury or illness. Some of the main approaches used by physiotherapists include: education and advice \u2013 physiotherapists can give general advice about things that can affect your daily lives, such as posture and correct lifting or carrying techniques to help prevent injuries movement, tailored exercise and physical activity advice \u2013 exercises may be recommended to improve your general health and mobility, and to strengthen specific parts of your body manual therapy \u2013 where the physiotherapist uses their hands to help relieve pain and stiffness, and to encourage better movement of the body There are other techniques that may sometimes be used, such as exercises carried out in water (hydrotherapy or aquatic therapy) or acupuncture. Read more about the main physiotherapy techniques. Finding a physiotherapist Physiotherapy is available through the NHS or privately. You may need a referral from your GP to have physiotherapy on the NHS, although in some areas it's possible to refer yourself directly. To find out whether self-referral is available in your area, ask the reception staff at your GP surgery or contact your local NHS Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) or trust. Waiting lists for NHS treatment can be long and some people choose to pay for private treatment. Most private physiotherapists accept direct self-referrals. Read more about accessing physiotherapy.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2016 Next review due: 26\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 504 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 217  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Neck pain and stiff neck Repetitive strain injury Shoulder pain Sports injuries External links Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: about physiotherapy Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: find a physio Health & Care Professions Council (HCPC) Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PID","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pelvic-inflammatory-disease","content":"Pelvic inflammatory disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic inflammatory disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Clinical trials Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Community Pelvic inflammatory disease Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Causes Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Diagnosis Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Treatment Pelvic-inflammatory-disease Complications Introduction  Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the female upper genital tract, including the womb, fallopian tubes and ovaries. PID is a common condition, although it's not clear how many women are affected in the UK. It mostly affects sexually active women aged 15 to 24. Symptoms PID often doesn't cause any obvious symptoms. Most women have mild symptoms that may include one or more of the following: pain around the pelvis or lower abdomen (tummy) discomfort or pain during sex that's felt deep inside the pelvis pain during urination bleeding between periods and after sex heavy periods painful periods  unusual vaginal discharge, especially if it's yellow or green A few women become very ill with: severe lower abdominal pain a high temperature (fever) nausea and vomiting When to seek medical advice It\u2019s important to visit your GP or a sexual health clinic if you experience any of the above symptoms. If you have severe pain, you should seek urgent medical attention from your GP or local A&E department. Delaying treatment for PID or having repeated episodes of PID can increase your risk of serious and long-term complications (see below). There's no simple test to diagnose PID. Diagnosis is based on your symptoms and the finding of tenderness on a vaginal (internal) examination. Swabs will be taken from your vagina and cervix (neck of the womb), but negative swabs don't rule out PID. Read more about diagnosing PID. Causes Most cases of PID are caused by a bacterial infection that's spread from the vagina or the cervix to the reproductive organs higher up. Many different types of bacteria can cause PID. In about one in four cases, it's caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as chlamydia or gonorrhoea. In many other cases, it's caused by bacteria that normally live in the vagina. Read more about the causes of PID. Treatment If diagnosed at an early stage, PID can be treated with a course of antibiotics, which usually lasts for 14 days. You'll be given a mixture of antibiotics to cover the most likely infections, and often an injection as well as tablets. It's important to complete the whole course and avoid having sexual intercourse during this time to help ensure the infection clears. Your recent sexual partners also need to be tested and treated to stop the infection recurring or being spread to others. Read more about treating PID. Complications The fallopian tubes can become scarred and narrowed if they're affected by PID. This can make it difficult for eggs to pass from the ovaries into the womb. This can increase your chances of having an ectopic pregnancy (a pregnancy in the fallopian tubes instead of the womb) in the future and can make some women infertile. It's estimated that around 1 in 10 women with PID becomes infertile as a result of the condition. Women who have had delayed treatment or had repeated episodes of PID are most at risk. However, most women treated for PID are still able to get pregnant without any problems. Read more about the complications of PID. Prevention You can reduce your risk of PID by always using condoms with a new sexual partner until they've had a sexual health check. Chlamydia is very common in young men, and most don't have any symptoms. If you're worried you may have an STI, visit your local genitourinary medicine (GUM) or sexual health clinic for advice. Find your local sexual health clinic. If you need an invasive gynaecological procedure, such as insertion of a coil or an abortion, have a check-up beforehand. Read more advice about STIs.  Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2015 Next review due: 03\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 219 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chlamydia Gonorrhoea Infertility Sexual health External links BASHH: PID (PDF, 385kb) FPA: chlamydia Contraception guide All you need to know about contraception, how it works and where to get it Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose sexual health services Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Piercing","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Body-piercing","content":"Body piercing - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Body piercing  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Body-piercing Clinical trials Body piercing Body-piercing Safety checklist Body-piercing Risks Body-piercing How it's performed Body-piercing Aftercare Introduction  If you decide to have a body piercing, make sure you find a reputable, licensed body piercing shop or piercer. Body piercing is especially popular with teenagers and young people. It\u2019s a fairly safe procedure, as long as it\u2019s performed by a licensed specialist, and care is taken by the piercer and yourself to avoid infection. Finding an approved piercer Most local councils keep registers of approved piercers who have passed hygiene and safety standards, and who are regularly inspected by health and safety officers. Contact your local council for further information. Don\u2019t try to carry out body piercing yourself. This can be very dangerous, as there\u2019s a high risk of infection or scarring. If you've already found a body piercing shop, take a look around before you go ahead with the piercing. Check for any potential health risks. You should be able to answer \"yes\" to all the questions on our safety checklist. Possible risks Bacterial infection is the main risk associated with body piercing. A build-up of pus (abscess) sometimes forms around the piercing site, which can be serious if left untreated. All professional body piercers in the UK use sterile instruments, so it's very rare to catch conditions such as hepatitis and HIV\/AIDS from body piercing. Read more about the risks of body piercing. How body piercing is carried out The skin may be cleaned with soap and water, and blotted dry before it\u2019s marked up and checked by both you and the piercer. The piercing will then be done with sterile piercing equipment. Generally, only earlobe piercings are carried out with a piercing gun, by either a jeweller or a professional body piercer, although some guns may be used on ear cartilage. Guns should not be used on any part of the body besides the ears. All other types of piercing should be carried out using a hollow needle, which is pushed through the skin and tissue of the body part. You'll normally feel a quick, sharp sting while the skin is being pierced. After a piercing, the area may bleed slightly and it may be tender, itchy and bruised for a few weeks. Read more about how piercings are carried out. Avoiding infection Follow the specialist's advice after you've had your piercing. This will usually involve keeping the area clean and dry, as well as looking for signs of infection. Don\u2019t touch or fiddle with the area and don\u2019t turn the piercing. If a crust develops over the piercing, don\u2019t remove it \u2013 these form naturally and are the body's way of protecting the pierced site. You may be advised to use a salt water solution or other wound wash to clean the area and dry it out. Strong surgical spirits and cream-based products should be avoided, because they can irritate the skin and trap bacteria. Read more about caring for a body piercing. Age restrictions There is no legal age restriction on most body piercings, but performing genital or female nipple piercing on someone under the age of 18 could be considered an offence. Some local authorities and piercing businesses may have their own regulations concerning age limits and consent for body piercings. You will usually need to sign a consent form to confirm that you wish to go ahead with the piercing. Children under the age of 16 may need to have a parent or guardian with them. Body piercing Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. More than a quarter of people experience complications after having a part of their body pierced, including swelling, infection and bleeding. Members of the public talk about their experience. Media last reviewed: 08\/07\/2015 Next review due: 08\/07\/2017 Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2015 Next review due: 26\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 162 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hepatitis B Hepatitis C campaign: piercing advice Keloid scarring Can I go swimming after a piercing? What should I do if I have discharge from my piercing? External links The British Body Piercing Association Festival health Everything you need to know to stay safe and enjoy yourself if you're heading to a festival this summer Keloid scarring Raised, shiny scars are known as keloid scars. Find out who gets them and how they're treated NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Piles (haemorrhoids)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Haemorrhoids","content":"Haemorrhoids (piles) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Haemorrhoids (piles)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Haemorrhoids Clinical trials Piles (haemorrhoids) Haemorrhoids Diagnosis Haemorrhoids Treatment Haemorrhoids Surgery Introduction  Haemorrhoids, also known as piles, are swellings containing enlarged blood vessels that are found inside or around the bottom (the rectum and anus). In many cases, haemorrhoids don't cause symptoms, and some people don't even realise they have them. However, when symptoms do occur, they may include: bleeding after passing a stool (the blood is usually bright red) itchy bottom a lump hanging down outside of the anus, which may need to be pushed back in after passing a stool a mucus discharge after passing a stool soreness, redness and swelling around your anus Haemorrhoids aren't usually painful, unless their blood supply slows down or is interrupted. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you have persistent or severe symptoms of haemorrhoids. You should always get any rectal bleeding checked out, so your doctor can rule out more potentially serious causes. The symptoms of haemorrhoids often clear up on their own or with simple treatments that can be bought from a pharmacy without a prescription (see below). However, speak to your GP if your symptoms don't get better or if you experience pain or bleeding. Your GP can often diagnose haemorrhoids using a simple internal examination of your back passage, although they may need to refer you to a colorectal specialist for diagnosis and treatment. Some people with haemorrhoids are reluctant to see their GP. However, there\u2019s no need to be embarrassed, because GPs are very used to diagnosing and treating haemorrhoids. Read more about diagnosing haemorrhoids. What causes haemorrhoids? The exact cause of haemorrhoids is unclear, but they're associated with increased pressure in the blood vessels in and around your anus. This pressure can cause the blood vessels in your back passage to become swollen and inflamed. Many cases are thought to be caused by too much straining on the toilet, due to prolonged constipation \u2013 this is often due to a lack of fibre in a person's diet. Chronic (long-term) diarrhoea can also make you more vulnerable to getting haemorrhoids. Other factors that might increase your risk of developing haemorrhoids include: being overweight or obese age \u2013 as you get older, your body's supporting tissues get weaker, increasing your risk of haemorrhoids being pregnant \u2013 which can place increased pressure on your pelvic blood vessels, causing them to enlarge (read more about piles in pregnancy) having a family history of haemorrhoids regularly lifting heavy objects a persistent cough or repeated vomiting sitting down for long periods of time Preventing and treating haemorrhoids  Haemorrhoid symptoms often settle down after a few days, without needing treatment. Haemorrhoids that occur during pregnancy often get better after giving birth. However, making lifestyle changes to reduce the strain on the blood vessels in and around your anus is often recommended. These can include: gradually increasing the amount of fibre in your diet \u2013 good sources of fibre include fruit, vegetables, wholegrain rice, wholewheat pasta and bread, pulses and beans, seeds, nuts and oats drinking plenty of fluid \u2013 particularly water, but avoiding or cutting down on caffeine and alcohol not delaying going to the toilet \u2013 ignoring the urge to empty your bowels can make your stools harder and drier, which can lead to straining when you do go to the toilet avoiding medication that causes constipation \u2013 such as painkillers that contain codeine losing weight (if you're overweight) exercising regularly \u2013 can help prevent constipation, reduce your blood pressure and help you lose weight These measures can also reduce the risk of haemorrhoids returning, or even developing in the first place. Medication that you apply directly to your back passage (known as topical treatments) or tablets bought from a pharmacy or prescribed by your GP may ease your symptoms and make it easier for you to pass stools. There are various treatment options for more severe haemorrhoids. One of these options is banding, which is a non-surgical procedure where a very tight elastic band is put around the base of the haemorrhoid to cut off its blood supply. The haemorrhoid should fall off after about a week. Surgery carried out under general anaesthetic (where you're unconscious) is sometimes used to remove or shrink large or external haemorrhoids. Read more about treating haemorrhoids and surgery for haemorrhoids. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 11\/03\/2016 Next review due: 11\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1196 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 612  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 321  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 39  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Constipation Digestive health Eating more fibre Lose weight Rectal bleeding External links NICE: circular stapled haemorrhoidectomy NICE: electrotherapy for treating haemorrhoids NICE: haemorrhoidal artery ligation NICE: stapled haemorrhoidopexy How to get more fibre into your diet Most people need to eat more fibre. Find out which foods are high in fibre and how to include more in your diet Piles in pregnancy Find out about piles (haemorrhoids) in pregnancy, and what you can to do ease them NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pilonidal sinus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pilonidal-sinus","content":"Pilonidal sinus - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pilonidal sinus  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pilonidal-sinus Clinical trials Pilonidal sinus Pilonidal-sinus Symptoms Pilonidal-sinus Causes Pilonidal-sinus Treatment Introduction  A pilonidal sinus is a small hole or \"tunnel\" in the skin. It usually develops in the cleft of the buttocks where the buttocks separate. More than one hole may develop, and often these are linked by tunnels under the skin. Most people associate the word sinus with the nose, but sinuses can occur anywhere in the body. Sinus is simply a medical term for a channel or cavity. A pilonidal sinus will not usually cause any noticeable symptoms unless it becomes infected. This can cause a pus-filled abscess to develop. Signs that you may have an infection include pain, redness and swelling in the affected area. See your GP as soon as possible if you think you have a pilonidal sinus. Without treatment, any pain and infection may get worse. Your GP should be able to diagnose a pilonidal sinus after looking at the affected area of skin. Further testing is not usually required. Read more about the symptoms of pilonidal sinus. Why do pilonidal sinuses happen? The exact cause of a pilonidal sinus is unclear, although it's thought to be caused by loose hair piercing the skin. Certain things can increase your chances of developing a pilonidal sinus, such as being obese, having a large amount of body hair, and having a job that involves a lot of sitting or driving. Read more about the causes of pilonidal sinus. How are pilonidal sinuses treated? If you have a pilonidal sinus, it's important to keep the area clean and dry. It may also help to remove any hair near the sinus. These steps can reduce the risk of infection. Showering at the end of the day to remove stray hairs from the cleft between your buttocks may also help. If a pilonidal sinus becomes infected, it should be treated as soon as possible, as it's likely to get worse. Treatment usually involves taking antibiotics and having the pus drained from the abscess during a minor operation called incision and drainage. If the sinus keeps becoming infected, it may have to be surgically removed. Several techniques can be used, including: cutting out the sinus and leaving the wound open so it can heal, and packing it with a dressing daily closing the wound with a flap of skin and stitches scraping out the sinuses and filling them with a special glue Read more about treating pilonidal sinus. Who is affected? Pilonidal sinuses are rare, affecting about 26 in 100,000 people each year. They affect at least twice as many men as women. The average age for a pilonidal sinus is 21 in men and 19 in women. They are less common in children and people over the age of 45. Pilonidal sinuses commonly occur at the top of the buttocks  NHS hospital services Find out how NHS hospitals operate, whether services are free and how to choose and a hospital that best suits your needs Page last reviewed: 25\/11\/2014 Next review due: 25\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 212 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 137  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Abscess Hidradenitis suppurativa Men's health 18-39 Skin care External links Pilonidal sinus information for patients (PDF, 80kb) Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Find and choose services for Pilonidal sinus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pins and needles","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pins-and-needles","content":"Pins and needles - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pins and needles  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Pins and needles (paraesthesia) is a pricking, burning, tingling or numbing sensation that's usually felt in the arms, legs, hands or feet. It doesn't usually cause any pain, but it can cause numbness or itching. Pins and needles is usually temporary, but can sometimes be long-lasting (chronic). Temporary pins and needles Most people have temporary pins and needles from time to time. It happens when pressure is applied to a part of the body, which cuts off the blood supply to the nerves in that area. This prevents the nerves from sending important signals to the brain. Putting weight on a body part (for example, by kneeling) or wearing tight shoes or socks can potentially cause pins and needles. Temporary pins and needles can be eased by simply taking the pressure off the affected area. This allows your blood supply to return, relieving the numbness or tingling sensation. Other common reasons for temporary pins and needles include: a condition known as Raynaud's disease \u2013 which affects the blood supply to certain areas of the body, such as the fingers and toes, and is usually triggered by cold temperatures or sometimes anxiety or stress hyperventilating (breathing too quickly) Long-lasting pins and needles Sometimes, pins and needles can occur over a long period of time. It can be a sign of a wide range of health conditions, including: diabetes \u2013 a condition in which there is too much glucose in the blood. a compressed ulnar nerve \u2013 the ulnar nerve starts in your neck and runs down the inside of your upper arm to your elbow, then down to the little finger side of your hand; it can be compressed at any point, but the elbow is most commonly affected carpal tunnel syndrome \u2013 pain, numbness and a burning or tingling sensation in the hand caused by a build-up of pressure in the small tunnel that runs from the wrist to the lower palm (the carpal tunnel) sciatica \u2013 pain caused by irritation or compression of the sciatic nerve, which runs from the back of your pelvis, through your buttocks and down both legs to your feet Persistent pins and needles can also occur after an injury, or be caused by certain treatments, such as chemotherapy. When to see your GP Most cases of pins and needles are temporary and the sensation disappears after the pressure is taken off the affected area. See your GP if you constantly have pins and needles or if it keeps coming back. It may be a sign of a more serious underlying health condition. Treatment for chronic pins and needles depends on the cause. For example, if it's caused by diabetes, treatment will focus on controlling your blood glucose levels. Other causes Long-lasting pins and needles may also be caused by: a condition that damages the nervous system \u2013 such as a stroke, multiple sclerosis or in extremely rare cases, a brain tumour exposure to toxic substances \u2013 such as lead or radiation certain types of medication \u2013 such as HIV medication, medication to prevent seizures (anticonvulsants), or some antibiotics  malnutrition \u2013 where the body lacks important nutrients because of a poor diet a vitamin B12 deficiency nerve damage caused by infection, injury or overuse \u2013 for example, a condition known as hand-arm vibration syndrome may be the result of regularly using vibrating tools alcohol misuse cervical spondylosis \u2013 the bones and tissues of the spine can wear down over time, leading to trapped nerves and occasionally pins and needles Page last reviewed: 01\/04\/2016 Next review due: 01\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2348 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 834  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 721  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 268  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 393  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Carpal tunnel syndrome Diabetes Itching Raynaud's disease Sciatica External links Multiple Sclerosis Trust NINDS: paraesthesia Stroke Association Itching Itching is a common symptom that can be caused by a number of conditions. Find out why it happens and what you can do about it Raynaud's phenomenon Raynaud's phenomenon is a common condition of the blood vessels that supply blood to the skin. Find out more Living with diabetes How to live healthily with diabetes, including advice on diet and lifestyle NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PIP implants","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/PIP-implants","content":"PIP breast implants - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories PIP breast implants  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview PIP breast implants Introduction  PIP breast implants were withdrawn from the UK in 2010 after it was found they had been fraudulently manufactured with unapproved silicone gel, and were far more prone to splitting (rupturing) than other breast implants. Research hasn't found any evidence to suggest that PIP implants pose a serious health risk, but they can cause unpleasant symptoms if they rupture, and you may be anxious about leaving them in. If you have PIP implants, you should discuss with a surgeon whether they should be taken out. The implants don't necessarily need to be removed, but they should be taken out if they rupture or you're worried about this happening. This page covers: What are PIP implants? Risks of PIP implants How to find out if you have PIP implants What to do if you have PIP implants Removing and replacing PIP implants What are PIP implants? PIP implants are silicone breast implants containing unapproved silicone gel. They were manufactured in France by a company called Poly Implant Prostheses (PIP). The concerns relate to all breast implants manufactured by PIP.  It's estimated that around 47,000 British women had PIP implants fitted, most of whom are still living with them. The vast majority of PIP implants were fitted in private clinics, but a small number were done on the NHS, mostly for breast reconstruction after breast cancer. Risks of PIP implants PIP implants are two to six times more likely to rupture than standard silicone implants. This doesn't pose a serious risk to your health, but it can cause some unpleasant symptoms. See your GP if you have signs of a rupture, such as: lumpiness or swelling in and around the breast   a change in the shape of the breast redness pain and tenderness a burning sensation enlarged lymph nodes in the armpit Ruptured PIP implants have no proven long-term health effects. British and European researchers have so far not found any evidence to suggest that the ingredients in the implants can cause cancer or are toxic. See the British expert review group's final report (PDF, 163kb) and the European Commission's Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR) report (PDF, 963kb) for more information. How to find out if you have PIP implants You may have been given details about your breast implants when they were fitted. This will often include information about the manufacturer of your implants. If you don't have these details, you can ask for them from the clinic or hospital where the implants were fitted. The medical notes kept by your GP may also include this information. Most women who had PIP implants fitted on the NHS should already have received a letter telling them about it and advising them what to do. What to do if you have PIP implants You should get medical advice if you have PIP implants. If the implants were fitted on the NHS, your GP can arrange for you to see an NHS specialist. If they were fitted privately, contact the clinic. If they were fitted privately and the clinic is unable or unwilling to help, speak to your GP about seeing an NHS specialist. You should have an ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to check whether your implants have ruptured. A ruptured implant should be removed as soon as possible. If there are no signs of a rupture, talk to your surgeon about the benefits and risks of taking the implants out or leaving them in. If you're concerned about leaving them in, removing them will usually be recommended. If you decide to keep them in, you should look out for signs of a rupture and have a yearly check-up with your doctor to make sure the implants are still intact. Removing and replacing PIP implants Some private clinics have agreed to remove and replace PIP breast implants free of charge, while others charge a fee. The following clinics have said they will replace PIP implants for free if medically necessary: BMI Healthcare HCA International The Holly Private Hospital Highgate Hospital Make Yourself Amazing\/MYA Cosmetic Surgery Nuffield Health Ramsay Health Care Spire Healthcare If the clinic where you had your implants fitted won't help you because it has closed or is unwilling to do so, you can have your implants removed free of charge on the NHS. However, the NHS in England won't provide replacement implants if your original implants were fitted privately, except in a very small number of cases where they were fitted for medical, rather than cosmetic, reasons. If you had PIP breast implants originally fitted on the NHS, you can have them removed and replaced by the NHS at no cost. The operation to remove and replace PIP implants is done wherever possible through the original surgical cuts.  Page last reviewed: 03\/03\/2016 Next review due: 03\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast cancer Cosmetic surgery Having an operation External links GOV.UK: PIP implants final report (PDF, 163kb) The British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons PIP Action Campaign Thinking of having a cosmetic procedure? Read this guide to understand the risks and effectiveness of different cosmetic treatments... PIP implant breast cancer link ruled out PIP breast implants were back in the news, after a new EC report that found that women who have PIP implants are not at higher risk of cancer. NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Breast implants","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide\/Pages\/breast-enlargement.aspx","content":"Breast enlargement Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Breast enlargement (implants) Having a breast enlargement is a major decision. It can be expensive, the results aren't guaranteed, and there are risks to weigh up. It involves inserting breast implants to increase the size of the breasts, change their shape, or make them more even. But before you go ahead, be absolutely sure about why you want them. Take time to reflect on your decision. It may help to read our article Is cosmetic surgery right for me? and to discuss it with your GP first. Read on to find out: How much does it cost? Where do I go? What does it involve? Choosing your implants  How long do breast implants last? Recovery Side effects to expect What could go wrong What to do if you have problems   More information How much does it cost? In the UK, breast implant surgery costs around £3,500-£7,000, plus the cost of any consultations or follow-up care that may not be included in the price. If there is a problem with the implant and it has to be removed, you'll usually need to pay for any replacement and further surgery yourself. Where do I go? If you're looking in England, check the Care Quality Commission (CQC) website for treatment centres that can perform the operation.  All independent clinics and hospitals that provide cosmetic surgery in England must be registered with the CQC. The CQC publishes inspection reports and performance ratings to help people choose care. Also, research the surgeon who is going to fit your breast implants. All doctors must, as a minimum, be registered with the General Medical Council (GMC). Check the register to see the doctor's fitness to practise history. You may also want to find out: how many operations they've performed where there have been complications what sort of follow-up you should expect if things go wrong their own patient satisfaction rates Read more about choosing a cosmetic surgeon. What does it involve? Breast implant surgery is carried out under general anaesthetic. The operation involves: making a cut (incision) in the skin next to or below the breast positioning the implant \u2013 either between your breast tissue and chest muscle, or behind your chest muscle stitching the incision and covering it with a dressing The operation takes between 60 and 90 minutes. You may be able to go home the same day, but may need to stay in hospital overnight if the operation was scheduled late in the day. Pain relief is provided if you experience any discomfort afterwards. Choosing your implants The type of implants most commonly used in the UK are silicone gel, but saline implants are also available. Your surgeon should discuss with you what shape and type of implant is best for you, but below is a rough guide. Silicone gel implants These are filled with either soft or firm silicone gel. Implants filled with the firmer gel are called cohesive gel implants. Some have a polyurethane coating.  Pros: Generally less likely to wrinkle than saline implants. The soft type can give a natural feel. Polyurethane-coated ones are claimed to reduce the risk of capsular contracture and the implant rotating \u2013 see What could go wrong. Cons: If a soft gel implant ruptures, silicone could spread into your breast and cause siliconomas \u2013 see What could go wrong. This is much less of an issue if cohesive implants are used, but this firmer gel may not feel as natural. Polyurethane-coated ones may cause a temporary skin reaction. Saline solution implants  Pros: If the implant were to rupture, the saline solution would be safely absorbed or passed out of your body.   Cons: More likely to rupture or deflate earlier than silicone, as they tend to slowly deflate over time. More prone to wrinkling or folding. May feel less natural than soft silicone. Where to place them The implants can either be placed between the breast and the chest muscle or behind the muscle. You'll need to decide with your surgeon where is best for you, but here's a rough guide. Between the breast and the muscle: most natural location less discomfort immediately after the operation chest muscle is not damaged Under the muscle: extra tissue coverage less risk of rippling and capsular contracture \u2013 see What could go wrong How long do breast implants last? Breast implants will not last a lifetime. They are likely to need replacing at some point. Some women may need further surgery after about 10 years, either because of problems with the implants or because their breasts have changed around the implants. Recovery It can take a few weeks to fully recover from breast implant surgery. You may need to take a week or two off work and shouldn't drive for at least one week. Some surgeons recommend wearing a sports bra 24 hours a day for up to three months after breast surgery. You'd need to avoid heavy lifting or strenuous exercise for at least a month, and keep your breast scars out of direct sunlight for about a year. After a week or two: Stitches would be removed (unless you had dissolvable stitches). Within six weeks: You'd usually be able to return to most of your normal activities. After a few months: Your breasts would usually start to look and feel more natural. You may be able to stop wearing your sports bra. Side effects to expect It's fairly common after breast implant surgery to have:  temporary pain, swelling and bruising a tight feeling in your chest for a few weeks   What could go wrong Breast implants can occasionally result in problems, including: thick, obvious scarring the breast tissue feeling hard because scar tissue has shrunk around the implant (capsular contracture) a ruptured implant \u2013 this may cause small tender lumps (siliconomas) only detectable on breast scans, and the implant will need to be removed creases or folds in the implant the implant rotating within the breast, which may lead to an abnormal shape 'rippling' of the implant \u2013 this occurs when the implant is covered by only a thin layer of tissue, which sticks to the implant surface and is very difficult to treat nerve problems in the nipples \u2013 they may become more sensitive, less sensitive, or completely desensitised; this can be temporary or permanent not being able to breastfeed or producing slightly less breast milk than you would without implants \u2013 your baby won't be harmed if you breastfeed with implants Also, any type of operation carries a small risk of: excessive bleeding infection \u2013 this is rare, but may mean the implant needs to be removed an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic a blood clot forming in the deep veins You should also be aware of a possible link between breast implants and a rare type of immune system cell cancer called anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). ALCL has been reported in a very small number of women who have had breast implants. So far, it has only been found in scar tissue that develops around textured breast implants. The surgeon should explain how likely all these risks and complications are, and how they would be treated if they occurred. Occasionally, people find the desired effect wasn't achieved and feel they need another operation. Mammograms after implants Mammograms for breast cancer screening are less accurate if you have implants, so it's important you tell the radiographer about them. It's safe to have mammograms and they do not cause implants to rupture. They may reveal an implant that has ruptured. What to do if you have problems Cosmetic surgery can sometimes go wrong and the results may not be what you expected. You should contact the clinic where the operation was carried out as soon as possible if you have severe pain or any unexpected symptoms, such as redness of your breast skin, a burning sensation or unusual swelling. If you experience a problem with your breast implants, you can report this through the government's Yellow Card Scheme. By reporting any issues, you are helping to provide more information on the safety of the implants. If you are not happy with the results or think the procedure wasn't carried out properly, you should take up the matter with your surgeon through the hospital or clinic where you were treated. If you have concerns about your care, you should contact the CQC. If necessary, you can make a complaint about a doctor to the General Medical Council (GMC). Breast implant registry By June 2016, everyone who has a breast enlargement operation in England will be able to have their breast implants recorded on a national registry.  This measure has been introduced following the 2010 PIP implant scandal, when many women were unable to find out whether they had been given the faulty implants. This registry is designed to capture all breast implant surgery carried out both privately and by the NHS, so patients can be easily traced if implants ever need to be recalled and removed. Talk to your surgeon if you want data about your implants to be stored. Find out more about the registry. More information British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): breast augmentation British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): breast augmentation   Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA): breast implants \u2013 report cases of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)  Royal College of Surgeons: cosmetic surgery FAQs Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links How do I choose a surgeon?  News: cosmetic treatments need new regulation PIP implants Reconstructive breast surgery after a mastectomy  British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS): breast augmentation British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS): breast augmentation PIP breast implants Information for women concerned about PIP breast implants NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Cosmetic surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/cosmetic-treatments-guide","content":"Cosmetic surgery and non-surgical procedures \u2013 NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Non-surgical procedures Botox injections Dermal fillers Permanent make-up Chemical peels Microdermabrasion Laser hair removal Skin lightening Tattoo removal Surgical procedures Is cosmetic surgery right for me? Is cosmetic surgery available on the NHS? How do I choose a surgeon? What should I know about cosmetic surgery abroad? Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Surgical fat transfer Facelift Ear correction surgery Tummy tuck Nose job Liposuction Hair transplant Labiaplasty (vulval surgery) Eyelid surgery You are here: Health A-Z The NHS guide to cosmetic procedures Share: Save: Print: Your guide to cosmetic procedures Are you thinking of having a cosmetic procedure? Whether you're considering a less invasive procedure like Botox or full cosmetic surgery like breast implants, it's a good idea to do your research. You can start by looking up the procedure in the list of information leaflets on this page, or browsing the menu tabs. All cosmetic procedures carry some level of risk. Cosmetic surgery has greater risks than non-surgical procedures. It's important you choose a practitioner or surgeon who is competent to perform the procedure and has the appropriate insurance. Also, make sure you weigh up the costs, as it's unusual for cosmetic surgery to be available on the NHS. You should factor in any additional costs for aftercare and future surgery, and correcting anything that goes wrong. If you're sure you want to go ahead with surgery, you'll need to choose a surgeon and hospital for your procedure and follow the steps from there. Why has this guide been produced? In recent years there has been a sharp rise in the number of men and women opting for cosmetic surgery and less invasive procedures such as Botox and fillers. Worryingly, this comes at a time when an independent review in 2013 (PDF, 1.38Mb) highlighted serious concerns about the cosmetic procedures industry.  The review proposed much tighter and rigorous regulation for non-surgical cosmetic procedures, and made a number of other recommendations to ensure patient safety.  It also stressed the importance of having accurate information and advice available for patients. That's why this NHS Choices guide to cosmetic procedures has been created. This guide should help you understand the risks and effectiveness of different cosmetic procedures, and ultimately help you decide whether cosmetic surgery is right for you.  Making improvements The government welcomed the review (PDF, 1.9Mb) and accepted most of the recommendations to ensure patient safety. The Department of Health has been working with key organisations to implement these recommendations. Improvements are now being made. Doctors who carry out cosmetic procedures anywhere in the UK have been issued with new guidance by the General Medical Council (GMC) to make sure they provide the best possible care for patients. The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) has also developed professional standards for all surgeons who perform cosmetic surgery. And the RCS will soon be introducing a new cosmetic surgery certification system. This means you will be able to find a surgeon who meets RCS standards for the procedure you are interested in, if you're sure you want to go ahead. Page last reviewed: 19\/05\/2016 Next review due: 19\/05\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 11 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Types of procedures Botox injections   Breast enlargement Breast reduction (female) Breast reduction (male) Chemical peels Dermal fillers   Ear correction surgery Eyelid surgery Facelift Hair transplant Labiaplasty (female genital surgery) Laser hair removal  Liposuction Microdermabrasion Nose job   Permanent make-up Skin lightening Surgical fat transfer Tattoo removal Tummy tuck Cosmetic surgery abroad Considering going overseas for your op? Make sure you weigh up any potential savings against the potential risks NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pityriasis rosea","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pityriasis-rosea","content":"Pityriasis Rosea - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pityriasis rosea  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pityriasis-rosea Clinical trials Pityriasis rosea pityriasis-rosea Symptoms pityriasis-rosea Treatment Introduction  Pityriasis rosea is a relatively common skin condition that causes a temporary skin rash of raised, red scaly patches on the body. The rash can be very itchy and usually clears within 2-12 weeks, but on rare occasions can last up to 5 months. It doesn\u2019t usually leave scars, although some people have discolouration of their skin afterwards, which can last for a few months. In many cases, a single pink or red oval patch of scaly skin called a \u201Cherald patch\u201D appears on your chest, back or tummy about 5-15 days before the rash develops. Read more about the symptoms of pityriasis rosea. When to see your GP If you have an unexplained rash, see your GP for a diagnosis. They will usually be able to confirm if it is pityriasis rosea, or something else such as eczema, psoriasis or a fungal skin infection. If there is some uncertainty, you may be referred to a dermatologist. If you develop blisters or soreness, or your eyes, genitals or mouth are affected, seek medical advice immediately as this may indicate another, more serious condition. Why it happens It's not known what causes pityriasis rosea. It\u2019s possible that the rash may be the result of a viral infection, although there's currently no evidence to support this. Pityriasis rosea isn\u2019t contagious and can't be spread to other people by physical contact, so there's no need for someone with the condition to be kept away from others. Treating pityriasis rosea In most cases, pityriasis rosea will clear up without any treatment. The rash usually goes away within 12 weeks, although it can sometimes last for up to 5 months. Emollients (moisturisers), steroid creams and antihistamines can be used to help relieve the itchiness. Read more about treating pityriasis rosea. Who is affected Pityriasis rosea can affect anyone, but older children and young adults (aged 10-35) are most commonly affected. The condition affects women more often than men. It\u2019s also more common during spring and autumn. Most people only experience one episode of pityriasis rosea in their lifetime. Around 1 in 50 people have repeated episodes. Pityriasis versicolor Pityriasis versicolor is another common skin condition that can be confused with pityriasis rosea, as the rash may look similar. However, there are important differences between the two. Pityriasis versicolor is caused by a yeast infection and can be treated with antifungal creams or anti-dandruff shampoos.  Read more about pityriasis versicolor. A typical \"herald patch\", often the first sign of pityriasis rosea  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/03\/2015 Next review due: 23\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 354 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 197  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 99  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Skin Itching Emollients Antihistamines Topical corticosteroids Pityriasis versicolor External links BAD: pityriasis rosea Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pityriasis versicolor","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pityriasis-versicolor","content":"Pityriasis versicolor - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pityriasis versicolor  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pityriasis-versicolor Clinical trials pityriasis-versicolor Community Pityriasis versicolor Introduction  Pityriasis versicolor, sometimes called tinea versicolor, is a common condition that causes small patches of skin to become scaly and discoloured. The patches may be darker or lighter than your normal skin colour, or may be red or pink. They tend to develop gradually and may join up to form larger patches over time. The areas most often affected by pityriasis versicolor include the trunk (chest and tummy), neck, upper arms and back. Although it may look unpleasant and the patches are sometimes itchy, pityriasis versicolor is harmless. You may still want to see your GP, as it usually only improves with treatment. Your GP can normally diagnose pityriasis versicolor by examining your skin. Why it happens Pityriasis versicolor is caused by a type of yeast called Malassezia. This yeast is found on the skin of over 90% of adults, where it normally lives without causing any problems. However, pityriasis versicolor can develop if this yeast starts to multiply more than usual. It\u2019s not clear exactly why this happens in some people and not in others. Several factors can increase your risk of developing pityriasis versicolor, including: living or staying in a warm, moist environment, including the UK, in the summer sweating excessively (hyperhidrosis) having naturally oily skin being a teenager or in your early 20s Pityriasis versicolor isn't related to poor hygiene. The condition can't be spread from person to person, because most people already have the Malassezia yeast on their skin. It\u2019s estimated that around 1 in every 100 people in the UK has pityriasis versicolor. How pityriasis versicolor is treated Pityriasis versicolor can be treated with antifungal medicines. These are available as shampoos, creams and tablets. Antifungal shampoos Antifungal shampoos (such as ketoconazole or selenium sulphide shampoo) are often the first treatment recommended for pityriasis versicolor. These are available to buy over the counter from pharmacies, or your GP can prescribe them. In most cases, these shampoos need to be applied to the affected areas of skin and left for 5 to 10 minutes before being rinsed off. This usually needs to be repeated every day for 5 to 7 days. You may experience some skin irritation or a burning sensation when using these shampoos, particularly selenium sulphide. It may be helpful to dilute the shampoo with water before applying it. Some people also find the odour of selenium sulphide shampoo unpleasant. Antifungal creams and tablets If only small areas of skin are affected, your GP may prescribe an antifungal cream. These creams usually need to be applied to the affected area of skin once or twice a day for several weeks. Some people experience a burning sensation when they use these antifungal creams, but this is uncommon. If a large area of skin is affected, or other treatments haven\u2019t helped, you may be prescribed antifungal tablets. These usually need to be taken once a day for one to four weeks. Side effects of these tablets are uncommon, although some people experience problems such as rashes, feeling sick and abdominal (tummy) pain while taking them. Outlook Overall, antifungal shampoos, creams and tablets are effective in killing the yeast that causes pityriasis versicolor. However, it can take several weeks or months for your skin to return to its normal colour and, in more persistent cases, treatment may need to be repeated. Recurrences It's common for pityriasis versicolor to come back after treatment, particularly during the summer or during holidays to warm and humid countries. However, you can reduce this likelihood by regularly using the antifungal shampoos mentioned above. For example, continuing to use the shampoo once every two to four weeks after the initial treatment, or once a day for a few days before going on holiday, can help to prevent pityriasis versicolor recurring. As these shampoos are available to buy from pharmacies, you don\u2019t need to see your GP for a prescription if you run out. If you develop pityriasis versicolor again after treatment, you can try treating it yourself with antifungal shampoo, or see your GP for advice and alternative treatments. If you have frequent and severe episodes of pityriasis versicolor, your GP may consider prescribing antifungal tablets to take a few times a month to prevent the condition reoccurring. Pityriasis versicolor or vitiligo? Pityriasis versicolor can sometimes be confused with vitiligo, as they both cause the skin to become discoloured in patches. However, there are many ways to tell the difference: Vitiligo often develops symmetrically (on both sides of your body at the same time), whereas pityriasis versicolor may not. Skin affected by vitiligo usually has a normal texture, whereas areas affected by pityriasis versicolor are usually slightly scaly or flaky. Vitiligo is more common around the mouth, eyes, fingers, wrists, armpits and groin, whereas pityriasis versicolor tends to develop on the chest, tummy, back and upper arms. Read more about vitiligo. Page last reviewed: 20\/07\/2015 Next review due: 20\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 150 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Keep skin healthy Pityriasis rosea Antifungal medicines Hyperhidrosis Pharmacy and medicines External links DermNet NZ: pityriasis versicolor images British Skin Foundation Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes How your pharmacy can help Your local pharmacy is more than just a shop for medicines \u2013 it could save a trip to the GP Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Plagiocephaly","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/plagiocephaly","content":"Plagiocephaly and brachycephaly (flat head syndrome) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Plagiocephaly and brachycephaly (flat head syndrome)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview plagiocephaly Clinical trials Plagiocephaly and brachycephaly Introduction  Babies sometimes develop a flattened head when they're a few months old, usually as a result of them spending a lot of time lying on their back. This is known as \"flat head syndrome\", and there are two main types: plagiocephaly \u2013 the head is flattened on one side, causing it to look asymmetrical; the ears may be misaligned and the head looks like a parallelogram when seen from above, and sometimes the forehead and face may bulge a little on the flat side brachycephaly \u2013 the back of the head becomes flattened, causing the head to widen, and occasionally the forehead bulges out These problems are quite common, affecting around one in every five babies at some point. In most cases they aren't a major cause for concern, as they don't have any effect on the brain and the head shape will often improve by itself over time. Your baby won't experience any pain or other symptoms, or any problems with their general development. This page covers: What causes plagiocephaly and brachycephaly When to get medical advice What you can do Helmets, headbands and mattresses Will my child's head shape return to normal? What causes plagiocephaly and brachycephaly? The skull consists of plates of bone that strengthen and join together as a child gets older. A young baby's skull is still relatively soft and can change shape if there's constant pressure on a particular part of their head. Reasons why this may happen include: sleeping on their back \u2013 the back or side of a baby's head can become flattened as a result of always sleeping on their back, but it's important they do this to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) problems in the womb \u2013 pressure can be placed on a baby's head before it's born if things are a bit squashed in the womb or there's a lack of amniotic fluid to cushion the baby being born prematurely \u2013 premature babies are more likely to develop a flattened head because their skull is softer when they're born and they may prefer to rest their head on one side at first because they're not yet able to move their head themselves neck muscle tightness \u2013 this can prevent a baby turning their head a particular way, meaning one side of their head is placed under more pressure Occasionally, a flattened head can be caused by the plates of the skull joining together too early. This is known as craniosynostosis. When to get medical advice Speak to your health visitor or GP if you're concerned about the shape of your baby's head or think they may have problems turning their head. They can examine your baby's head and suggest things you can do to help. A slightly flattened head isn't usually anything to worry about, but it's a good idea to get advice early on so you can take steps to stop it getting any worse. What you can do The shape of your baby's head should improve naturally over time as their skull develops and they start moving their head, rolling around, and crawling. Simple measures to take pressure off the flattened part of their head can also help: give your baby time on their tummy during the day \u2013 encourage them to try new positions during play time, but make sure they always sleep on their back as this is safest for them switch your baby between a sloping chair, a sling and a flat surface \u2013 this ensures there isn't constant pressure on one part of their head change the position of toys and mobiles in their cot \u2013 this will encourage your baby to turn their head on to the non-flattened side alternate the side you hold your baby when feeding and carrying reduce the time your baby spends lying on a firm flat surface, such as car seats and prams \u2013 try using a sling or front carrier when practical If your baby has difficulty turning their head, physiotherapy may help loosen and strengthen their neck muscles. Corrective surgery may be needed if they have craniosynostosis. Read more about treating craniosynostosis. Helmets, headbands and mattresses There are specially designed helmets and headbands that some people claim can help improve the shape of a baby's skull as they grow. These devices apply pressure to \"bulging\" parts of the skull and relieve pressure from other parts, potentially allowing growth in the flatter areas. Treatment is started when the child's skull is still soft, usually at around five or six months old, and the device is worn almost continuously (up to 23 hours a day) for several months. However, these helmets and headbands generally aren't recommended because: there isn't clear evidence to suggest they work they often cause problems such as skin irritation and rashes they're expensive, typically costing around £2,000 your baby will need to be checked every few weeks to monitor their head growth and make any necessary adjustments they may be uncomfortable and distressing for your baby Some people try special curved mattresses that are designed to distribute the weight of a baby's head over a larger area so less pressure is placed on a particular point of their skull. These are cheaper than helmets and headbands, but there's currently only limited evidence to suggest they may help. Will my child's head shape return to normal? Mild flattening of the head will usually improve if you use the simple measures outlined above, although it may be a couple of months before you start to notice an improvement. Your baby's head may not return to a completely perfect shape, but by the time they're one or two years old any flattening will be barely noticeable. More severe cases will also get better over time, although some flattening will usually remain. As your child becomes more mobile and their hair grows, the appearance of their head should improve. It's very rare for a child to experience problems such as teasing when they reach school age. You may consider using a helmet or headband if you're worried about your child, but it's not clear whether these always work. You should also bear in mind the inconvenience, expense, and possible discomfort for you and your child. Page last reviewed: 22\/02\/2016 Next review due: 22\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 120 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 33  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Craniosynostosis Helping your baby sleep External links Great Ormond Street Hospital: plagiocephaly NCT: flat head syndrome Helping your baby to sleep Tips to help your baby sleep, including where they should sleep and establishing a routine Baby car seats How to choose the right car seat for your baby and make sure it's fitted correctly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Plantar fasciitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/heel-pain","content":"Heel pain - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Heel pain  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview heel-pain Clinical trials Heel pain heel-pain Causes heel-pain Treatment heel-pain Prevention   Heel pain is a common foot condition. It's usually felt as an intense pain when using the affected heel. Heel pain usually builds up gradually and gets worse over time. The pain is often severe and occurs when you place weight on your heel. In most cases, only one heel is affected, although estimates suggest that around a third of people have pain in both heels. The pain is usually worse first thing in the morning, or when you first take a step after a period of inactivity. Walking usually improves the pain, but it often gets worse again after walking or standing for a long time. Some people may limp or develop an abnormal walking style as they try to avoid placing weight on the affected heel. What causes heel pain? Most cases of heel pain are caused when a band of tissue in the foot, known as the plantar fascia, becomes damaged and thickens. Plantar fasciitis is the medical term for the thickening of the plantar fascia. The plantar fascia The plantar fascia is a tough and flexible band of tissue that runs under the sole of the foot. It connects the heel bone with the bones of the foot, and acts as a kind of shock absorber to the foot. Sudden damage, or damage that occurs over many months or years, can cause tiny tears (microtears) to develop inside the tissue of the plantar fascia. This can cause the plantar fascia to thicken, resulting in heel pain. The surrounding tissue and the heel bone can also sometimes become inflamed. Read more about the causes of heel pain. When to see your GP See your GP or a podiatrist (foot problems specialist) if you\u2019ve had persistent heel pain for a number of weeks and it hasn't cleared up. They should be able to diagnose the cause of your heel pain by asking about your symptoms and medical history and examining your heel and foot. Further tests will only usually be needed if you have additional symptoms that suggest the cause of your heel pain isn't inflammation, such as: numbness or a tingling sensation in your foot, which could be a sign of nerve damage in your feet and legs (peripheral neuropathy) your foot feels hot and you have a high temperature (fever) of 38°C (100.4°F) or above, which could be a sign of a bone infection your heel is stiff and swollen, which could be a sign of arthritis Possible further tests that may be recommended include blood tests, X-rays, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or an ultrasound scan. Who gets heel pain? Heel pain is a common foot condition. An estimated one in 10 people will have at least one episode of heel pain at some point in their life. People who run or jog regularly, and older adults who are 40-60 years of age, are the two main groups affected by heel pain. Treating heel pain There are a number of treatments that can help relieve heel pain and speed up your recovery. These include: resting your heel \u2013 avoiding walking long distances and standing for long periods regular stretching \u2013 stretching your calf muscles and plantar fascia pain relief \u2013 using an icepack on the affected heel and taking painkillers, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) wearing well fitted shoes that support and cushion your feet \u2013 running shoes are particularly useful using supportive devices \u2013 such as orthoses (rigid supports that are put inside the shoe) or strapping Around four out of five cases of heel pain resolve within a year. However, having heel pain for this length of time can often be frustrating and painful. In about one in 20 cases, the above treatments aren't enough and surgery may be needed to release the plantar fascia.  Read more about treating heel pain. Preventing heel pain Being overweight can place excess pressure and strain on your feet, particularly on your heels. Losing weight and maintaining a healthy weight by combining regular exercise with a healthy, balanced diet can be beneficial for your feet. Wearing appropriate footwear is also important. Ideally, you should wear shoes with a low to moderate heel that supports and cushions your arches and heels. Avoid wearing shoes without heels. Read more about preventing heel pain. Page last reviewed: 16\/10\/2014 Next review due: 16\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 2589 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1371  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 680  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 156  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 94  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 288  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Heel pain Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Find out the causes and symptoms of heel pain and the treatments available, including what you can do to prevent or alleviate it. Media last reviewed: 14\/07\/2015 Next review due: 14\/07\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Bursitis Choosing sports shoes Flat feet Foot health How to stretch after exercising Sports injuries Strength and flexibility External links The Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists: foot health Foot health How to keep your feet healthy and choose the right sports shoes, plus what to do if you have smelly feet Choosing the right sports shoes Sports shoes are probably the most important piece of fitness equipment you'll buy. Here's how to choose the right pair Sports injuries Read about what you can do to treat and prevent sports injuries, and when you should seek medical advice NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Plasma cell myeloma","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Multiple-myeloma","content":"Multiple myeloma - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Multiple myeloma  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Multiple-myeloma Clinical trials Multiple myeloma Multiple-myeloma Symptoms Multiple-myeloma Causes Multiple-myeloma Diagnosis Multiple-myeloma Treatment Introduction  Multiple myeloma, also known as myeloma, is a type of bone marrow cancer. Bone marrow is the spongy tissue found at the centre of some bones. It produces the body's blood cells. Multiple myeloma affects the plasma cells (a type of blood cell) inside the bone marrow. Myeloma does not usually take the form of a lump or tumour. Instead, the myeloma cells divide and expand within the bone marrow, damaging the bones and affecting the production of healthy blood cells. Myeloma often affects many places in the body, which is why it is called multiple myeloma. Commonly affected areas include the spine, skull, pelvis and ribs. Signs and symptoms In the early stages, myeloma may not cause any symptoms. It's often only suspected or diagnosed after a routine blood or urine test. However, myeloma will eventually cause a wide range of problems, including: a persistent dull ache or specific areas of tenderness in your bones weak bones that break (fracture) easily tiredness, weakness and shortness of breath (caused by anaemia) repeated infections less commonly, bruising and unusual bleeding \u2013 such as frequent nosebleeds, bleeding gums and heavy periods Read more about the symptoms of multiple myeloma. When to see your GP See your GP if you have any of the above symptoms. While they're unlikely to be caused by cancer, it's best to get a proper diagnosis. Your GP will examine you to check for bone tenderness, bleeding, signs of infection, and any other symptoms that suggest you may have myeloma. They may also arrange blood and urine tests that can detect abnormal proteins produced by myeloma cells. If myeloma is suspected, you will be referred to a consultant haematologist (a specialist in blood conditions) for further tests and treatment. Read more about diagnosing multiple myeloma. Who is affected? Multiple myeloma is an uncommon type of cancer, with around 4,800 new cases diagnosed each year in the UK. It's not known exactly what causes the condition, although it's more common in: people with monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) \u2013 an excess number of protein molecules called immunoglobulins in your blood men adults over 60 \u2013 most cases are diagnosed at around the age of 70, and cases affecting people under the age of 40 are rare black people \u2013 multiple myeloma is about twice as common in black populations compared with white and Asian populations Read more about the causes of multiple myeloma. How multiple myeloma is treated There is currently no cure for multiple myeloma, but treatment can often help control it for several years. Treatment will often involve: a combination of anti-myeloma medications to destroy the myeloma cells medicines and procedures to prevent and treat problems caused by myeloma, such as bone pain, fractures and anaemia anti-myeloma medicines to control the cancer when it comes back (relapses) As part of your treatment, you may be asked if you want to take part in a clinical trial to help researchers develop better treatments for multiple myeloma. Read more about treating multiple myeloma. Outlook The outlook for multiple myeloma is improving all the time, but the condition still can't be completely cured. Research is ongoing to try to find new and better treatments. As with other types of cancer, the outlook depends on things such as your age and general health. Some people may live less than a year, while others may live 20 years or more. Overall, about 77 in every 100 people will live at least a year, 47 in every 100 will live at least five years, and 33 in every 100 will live at least 10 years. Support groups If you've been diagnosed with multiple myeloma, you may find it useful to contact a local or national support group, such as Myeloma UK. Support groups can offer more information and advice. They can also often put you in touch with other people in a similar situation so you can share advice and talk about your experiences. The Myeloma UK website has more information about how they can help you and finding a local support group. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 16\/02\/2015 Next review due: 16\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 242 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 114  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 24  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anaemia Blood tests Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy External links Cancer Research UK: myeloma Leukaemia Care: multiple myeloma Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research: myeloma Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation Myeloma UK Coping with a cancer diagnosis Find out how to deal with a cancer diagnosis and where to find support, and watch a video about one man's experience Living with cancer Information on living with cancer, including treatment, support and different personal experiences of cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Plasma components","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Plasma-products","content":"Plasma components - Introduction - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Plasma components  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Plasma-products Clinical trials Plasma components Plasma-products How they are used Plasma-products Adverse reactions Introduction  Plasma is the fluid part of blood and makes up the bulk of the volume. It contains substances that can be used to treat a number of different conditions. Blood is made up of four separate components, which each perform a different function. They are: red blood cells - carry oxygen around the body and remove carbon dioxide white blood cells - help the body fight infection platelets - tiny cells that trigger the process that causes the blood to clot (thicken) plasma - yellow fluid that transports blood cells and platelets around the body and contains a number of substances, including proteins What is plasma? Plasma is the largest component of blood, making up about 55% of its overall content. It's mainly made of water and surrounds the blood cells, carrying them around the body. Plasma helps maintain blood pressure and regulates body temperature. It contains a complex mix of substances used by the body to perform important functions. These substances include minerals, salts, hormones and proteins. Three important proteins found in plasma are: albumin clotting (coagulation) factors immunoglobulins How plasma components are used Plasma components can be used in a number of different ways, depending on the condition they're being used to treat. The two main methods of using plasma are: fresh frozen plasma transfusion - where plasma is separated from donated blood and frozen until needed; it's then thawed under controlled conditions and transfused to the recipient plasma exchange - where a special machine is used to remove plasma from the patient's blood; it's then replaced with a substitute plasma component from donors Read more about how plasma and plasma components are used. The following plasma components can be used to treat a variety of different conditions. Albumin Albumin cleans the blood, carries substances around the body, and helps maintain the correct amount of fluid circulating in the body. Human albumin solution can be used as a treatment to help people with severe burns, sepsis, liver disease or kidney disease. Clotting factors Clotting (coagulation) substances called clotting factors help control bleeding and work together with platelets to ensure the blood clots effectively. Fresh frozen plasma and clotting factors can be used to treat bleeding disorders. For example, they can be used in severe injuries when there's a lot of bleeding. In the UK, specific clotting factors are also used to treat haemophilia, an inherited condition that affects the blood's ability to clot. Immunoglobulins Immunoglobulins are part of the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness). Immunoglobulins are antibodies that the body produces to fight a variety of infections. For example, they're used to fight health conditions such as: chickenpox - a serious but usually shortlived viral infection hepatitis - a viral infection that causes the liver to become inflamed (swollen) rabies - a very rare infection of the central nervous system that's passed on to humans from infected animals Normal human immunoglobulins can be used to support people who have conditions where their immune system is having difficulty producing antibodies. Plasma is the source of anti-D immunoglobulin, a substance often given by injection to pregnant women with a rhesus-negative blood group (RhD negative) whose unborn baby may have a rhesus-positive blood group (RhD positive). This treatment prevents the mother becoming sensitised to the baby's blood and stops immune anti-D developing. Immune anti-D can cause rhesus disease in subsequent pregnancies, which is a potentially fatal condition. Risks of using plasma components Some people can experience problems related to a plasma transfusion. These can vary in severity from a slight increase in temperature to the development of a serious condition called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) in very rare cases. Read more about adverse reactions to plasma components. Video: blood donation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Around 7,000 people give blood every day. Find out why people choose to donate, how the process works and what the blood is used for. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Page last reviewed: 16\/09\/2014 Next review due: 16\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 53 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood donation Blood groups Blood transfusion Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) Haemophilia Rhesus disease External links British Blood Transfusion Society The Haemophilia Society NHS Blood & Transplant: how plasma is used Sickle Cell Society Blood groups The four main blood groups are A, B, AB and O. Each group can be either RhD positive or RhD negative, which means your blood group can be one of eight types Donating blood Doctors rely on blood donations to carry out life-saving treatments every day. Find out how you can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Plastic surgery","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Plastic-surgery","content":"Plastic surgery - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Plastic surgery  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Plastic-surgery Clinical trials Plastic surgery Plastic-surgery Why it's used Plastic-surgery How it's performed Plastic-surgery Complications Introduction  Plastic surgery is the branch of surgery specialising in repairing and reconstructing missing or damaged tissue and skin, usually because of surgery, illness, injury or an abnormality present from birth. The main aim of plastic surgery is to restore the function of tissues and skin to as close to normal as possible. Improving the appearance of body parts is an important, but secondary, aim. Plastic surgery is different to cosmetic surgery, which is surgery carried out solely to change a healthy person\u2019s appearance to achieve what they feel is a more desirable look. There are separate pages on cosmetic surgery. When plastic surgery is used Plastic surgery can be used to repair: abnormalities that have existed from birth, such as a cleft lip and palate, webbed fingers and birthmarks areas damaged by the removal of cancerous tissue, such as from the face or breast extensive burns or other serious injuries, such as those sustained during traffic accidents Plastic surgery can also help a person recover their self-esteem and confidence following surgery. Read more about why plastic surgery is used. Availability of plastic surgery Plastic surgery for reconstructive purposes is usually carried out free of charge on the NHS. However, availability can vary around the country and is determined by local clinical commissioning groups (CCGs). Plastic surgery is performed by plastic surgeons with extensive training who belong to professional associations, such as the British Association of Plastic Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS). Most people are referred to NHS plastic surgeons by their GP or a specialist consultant they see about their condition. Plastic surgery is also available privately, but can be very expensive. It's still a good idea to speak to your GP or specialist first if you're considering private treatment, even if a referral isn't required. Plastic surgery techniques Plastic surgery uses a wide range of reconstructive techniques, but the main ones are: skin grafts \u2013 where parts of healthy skin from an unaffected area of the body are removed and used to replace lost or damaged skin skin flap surgery \u2013 where a piece of tissue from one part of the body is transferred to another, along with the blood vessels that keep it alive; it's called flap surgery because the healthy tissue usually remains partially attached to the body while it is repositioned tissue expansion \u2013 surrounding tissue is stretched to enable the body to \"grow\" extra skin, which can then be used to help reconstruct the nearby area As well as these main techniques, plastic surgeons use a wide range of other methods, such as fat transfer or grafting (where fat is removed from one area and inserted in another area, usually to correct unevenness), vacuum closure (where suction is applied to a wound through a sterile piece of foam to draw out fluid and encourage healing), camouflage make-up or cream, and prosthetic devices, such as artificial limbs. Read more about how plastic surgery is performed. Risks of plastic surgery As with any type of surgery, there are risks and complications associated with plastic surgery. The degree of risk will depend on a number of factors, including whether the surgery is to a small or large area of tissue and the overall health of the person having the procedure. Some procedures carry specific risks, but general risks include: pain and discomfort infection scarring the failure of the repaired area of skin, due to a restricted blood supply Read more about the possible complications of plastic surgery. Page last reviewed: 08\/04\/2015 Next review due: 08\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 51 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cosmetic surgery guide Birthmarks Cleft lip and palate Breast reconstruction External links BAAPS BAPRAS British Burn Association Changing Faces Cleft Lip and Palate Association Creating a new breast Plastic surgeon Chris Caddy explains breast reconstruction surgery after cancer, including how and when it is carried out 'My baby's birthmark' Claire Lewin talks about bringing up her daughter Eloise, who was born with a haemangioma Find and choose plastic surgery services Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pleurisy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pleurisy","content":"Pleurisy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pleurisy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pleurisy Clinical trials Pleurisy Pleurisy Causes Pleurisy Treatment Introduction  Pleurisy is inflammation of the sheet-like layers that cover the lungs (the pleura). The most common symptom of pleurisy is a sharp chest pain when breathing deeply. Sometimes the pain is also felt in the shoulder. The pain may be worse when you cough, sneeze or move around, and it may be relieved by taking shallow breaths. Other symptoms can include shortness of breath and a dry cough. Visit your GP if you experience the above symptoms. Seek immediate medical help if your chest pain is severe, particularly if you also have other symptoms, such as coughing up blood, nausea or sweating. Seeing your GP Pleurisy can usually be diagnosed by studying your symptoms. Your GP can listen to your chest to check for the distinctive dry, crunching sound that suggests you may have pleurisy. Further tests may be needed to identify the underlying cause of your pleurisy and to assess how severe it is. These can include: blood tests to determine whether you have an infection or an autoimmune condition chest X-rays an ultrasound scan  a computerised tomography (CT) scan a biopsy \u2013 a small sample of pleural or lung tissue is removed for further testing What causes pleurisy? Most cases are the result of a viral infection (such as the flu) or a bacterial infection (such as pneumonia). In rarer cases, pleurisy can be caused by conditions such as a blood clot blocking the flow of blood into the lungs (pulmonary embolism) or lung cancer. Pleurisy can affect people of all ages, but people of 65 years and over are most at risk, because they're more likely to develop a chest infection. Read more about the causes of pleurisy. How is pleurisy treated? Treatment for pleurisy depends on the underlying cause. For example, pleurisy caused by a viral infection will often resolve itself without treatment. However, pleurisy caused by a bacterial infection is usually treated with antibiotics, and people who are frail or already in poor health may be admitted to hospital. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, are often used to relieve the chest pain associated with pleurisy. If excess fluid builds up between the pleural layers, it may be necessary to drain the fluid to prevent breathing difficulties. Read more about treating pleurisy. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 28\/01\/2015 Next review due: 28\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1053 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 545  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 303  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 100  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chest pain Chest infection Flu Pneumonia External links US National Library of Medicine: pleural effusion Shortness of breath Why you should see a doctor if you're feeling breathless Find and choose services for Pleurisy Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pneumococcal infections","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pneumococcal-infections","content":"Pneumococcal infections - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pneumococcal infections  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pneumococcal-infections Clinical trials Introduction Pneumococcal-infections Symptoms Pneumococcal-infections Causes Pneumococcal-infections Diagnosis Pneumococcal-infections Treatment Pneumococcal-infections Prevention Introduction  Pneumococcal infections are caused by the Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria, and range from mild to severe. There are more than 90 different strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) bacteria (known as serotypes), some of which cause more serious infection than others. The symptoms of a pneumococcal infection can vary, depending on the type of infection you have. Common symptoms include: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) aches and pains headache Types of pneumococcal infection Pneumococcal infections usually fall into one of two categories: non-invasive pneumococcal infections \u2013 these occur outside the major organs or the blood and tend to be less serious invasive pneumococcal infections \u2013 these occur inside a major organ or the blood and tend to be more serious Non-invasive pneumococcal infections Non-invasive pneumococcal infections include: bronchitis \u2013 infection of the bronchi (the tubes that run from the windpipe down into the lungs) otitis media \u2013 ear infection sinusitis \u2013 infection of the sinuses Invasive pneumococcal infections Invasive pneumococcal infections include: bacteraemia \u2013 a relatively mild infection of the blood septicaemia (blood poisoning) \u2013 a more serious blood infection osteomyelitis \u2013 infection of the bone septic arthritis \u2013 infection of a joint pneumonia \u2013 infection of the lungs meningitis \u2013 infection of the meninges (the protective membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord) Who is at risk? People with a weakened immune system are most at risk of catching a pneumococcal infection. This may be because: they have a serious health condition, such as HIV or diabetes, that weakens their immune system they are having treatment or taking medication that weakens their immune system, such as chemotherapy Other at-risk groups include: babies and young children under two years of age adults over 65 years of age people who smoke or misuse alcohol Read more about the causes of pneumococcal infections. Cases of invasive pneumococcal infection usually peak in the winter, during December and January. Treating pneumococcal infections  Non-invasive pneumococcal infections are usually mild and go away without the need for treatment. Rest, fluids and over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol are usually advised. More invasive types of pneumococcal infections can be treated with antibiotics, either at home or in hospital. Read more about how pneumococcal infections are treated. Pneumococcal vaccines There are two different types of pneumococcal vaccine used. These are: pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) \u2013 which is given to all children as part of the childhood vaccination programme; it's given in three separate doses at eight and 16 weeks and at one year of age  pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV) \u2013 which is given to people aged 65 years or over, and others who are at high risk The PCV protects against 13 types of S. pneumoniae bacteria, and the PPV protects against 23 types. It is thought that the PPV is around 50-70% effective at preventing more serious types of invasive pneumococcal infection. Read about pneumococcal vaccination and when pneumococcal vaccination is used. Outlook The outlook for pneumonia in people who are otherwise healthy is good, but the infection can lead to serious complications in people who are very young, very old or have another serious health condition. However, due to the introduction of the PCV in 2002, the number of people dying from complications that arise from pneumonia has fallen to around 7%. The outlook for other types of invasive pneumococcal infections such as bacteraemia is generally good, although there is about a 1 in 20 chance that bacteraemia will trigger meningitis as a secondary infection. Multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (MDRSP) During the 1990s, the increasing levels of S. pneumoniae that had developed a resistance to three or more types of antibiotics was a major concern. These types of bacteria are known as multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (MDRSP). MDRSP is a real concern because it is challenging to treat and carries a higher risk of causing complications. Since the introduction of pneumococcal vaccines, fewer cases of infection have led to antibiotics being used less and the chance of bacteria developing resistance to antibiotics becoming smaller. The ability for bacteria to become resistant to antibiotics is the reason why GPs are becoming increasingly reluctant to prescribe antibiotics for mild infections. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/08\/2014 Next review due: 19\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 138 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Pneumococcal disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Professor Brian Duerden, CBE, explains how pneumococcal disease can cause pneumonia and other invasive infections. He describes the effects of the disease on older people and children, and what you can do to prevent it. Media last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links The Antibiotic Awareness Campaign Is my child seriously ill? Meningitis Pneumonia Pneumococcal vaccine Vaccinations: a guide External links British Lung Foundation Vaccination calendar Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by Pneumococcal vaccine The pneumococcal vaccination, also known as the pneumo jab, protects against pneumococcal infections NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pneumococcal vaccination","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/pneumococcal-vaccination.aspx","content":"Pneumococcal vaccine - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: Pneumococcal vaccine The pneumococcal vaccine protects against serious and potentially fatal pneumococcal infections. It's also known as the \"pneumo jab\" or pneumonia vaccine. Pneumococcal infections are caused by the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae and can lead to pneumonia, septicaemia (a kind of blood poisoning) and meningitis. At their worst, they can cause permanent brain damage, or even kill. This page covers: Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine How often is the pneumococcal vaccine given The different types of pneumococcal vaccine How the pneumococcal vaccine works Who shouldn't have the pneumococcal vaccine Side effects of the pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? A pneumococcal infection can affect anyone. However, some people are at higher risk of serious illness and can be given the pneumococcal vaccination on the NHS. These include: babies  adults aged 65 or over children and adults with certain long-term health conditions, such as a serious heart or kidney condition Read more about who should have the pneumo jab. How often is the pneumococcal vaccine given? Babies receive the pneumococcal vaccine as three separate injections, at 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old. People over 65 only need a single pneumococcal vaccination, which will protect for life. It is not given annually like the flu jab. People with a long-term health condition may need just a single one-off pneumococcal vaccination or five-yearly vaccination, depending on their underlying health problem. The different types of pneumonia vaccine The type of pneumococcal vaccine you are given depends on your age and health. The two types are: pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) \u2013 this is used to vaccinate children under two years old as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. It's known by the brand name Prevenar 13. Read the patient information leaflet for Prevenar 13. pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV) \u2013 this is given to people aged 65 and over, and to people at high risk due to long-term health conditions. Read the patient information leaflet for PPV.  Children at risk of pneumococcal infections can have the PPV vaccine from the age of two years onwards. It's thought not to work in children under the age of two.  How the pneumococcal vaccine works Both types of pneumococcal vaccine encourage your body to produce antibodies against pneumococcal bacteria. Antibodies are proteins produced by the body to neutralise or destroy disease-carrying organisms and toxins. They protect you from becoming ill if you are infected with the bacteria. More than 90 different strains of the pneumococcal bacterium have been identified, though only 8 to 10 of them cause the most serious infections. The childhood vaccine (PCV) protects against 13 strains of the pneumococcal bacterium, while the adult vaccine (PPV) protects against 23 strains. The pneumococcal vaccine is thought to be around 50-70% effective at preventing pneumococcal disease. Both the PPV and the PCV are inactivated or \"killed\" vaccines and do not contain any live organisms. They cannot cause the disease against which they protect.  Read more about killed vaccines. Who shouldn't have the pneumo jab? Occasionally, you or your child may need to delay having the vaccination or avoid it completely because of the following: Vaccine allergy Tell your GP if you or your child has had a bad reaction to any vaccination in the past. If there's been a confirmed severe allergic reaction, called an anaphylactic reaction, to the pneumococcal vaccine or any ingredient in the vaccine, it's best to avoid having it. However, if it was only a mild reaction, such as a rash, it is generally safe to have the vaccine. Fever at the vaccination appointment If you or your child are mildly unwell at the time of the vaccination, it's safe to have the vaccine. However, if you or your child are more seriously ill \u2013 for example, with a high temperature \u2013 it's best to delay the vaccination until after recovery.  Pregnancy and breastfeeding It's thought to be safe to have the pneumococcal vaccine during pregnancy and while you're breastfeeding. But, as a precaution, if you are pregnant, you may want to wait until you have had your baby (unless the benefits of having the vaccine outweigh the risks to your child). Side effects of the pneumococcal vaccine Like most vaccines, the childhood and adult versions of the pneumococcal vaccine can sometimes cause mild side effects, including: a mild fever redness at the site of the injection hardness or swelling at the site of the injection There are no serious side effects listed for either the childhood or adult versions of the vaccine, apart from an extremely small risk of serious allergic reaction. Read about the side effects of the pneumococcal vaccination. This video tells the story of 11-year-old Sam, who had pneumococcal meningitis as a baby (before the childhood pneumococcal vaccine was introduced) and was left severely brain damaged. Page last reviewed: 29\/02\/2016 Next review due: 28\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 519 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 292  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 132  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Pneumococcal infections Pneumococcal infections are caused by the S. pneumoniae bacterium. Find out who's at risk and which vaccinations are available Protect your child against measles Find out more about the MMR jab NHS Choices links Pneumonia Meningitis Blood poisoning Pneumococcal vaccination - Clinical trials External links NHS leaflet: baby vaccinations up to 12 months (PDF, 1.24MB)  Search for services Find and compare services Services GP Parenting information and support services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pneumonia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pneumonia","content":"Pneumonia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pneumonia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pneumonia Clinical trials Pneumonia Community Pneumonia Pneumonia Treatment   Pneumonia is swelling (inflammation) of the tissue in one or both lungs. It's usually caused by a bacterial infection. At the end of the breathing tubes in your lungs are clusters of tiny air sacs. If you have pneumonia, these tiny sacs become inflamed and fill up with fluid. Symptoms of pneumonia The symptoms of pneumonia can develop suddenly over 24 to 48 hours, or they may come on more slowly over several days. Common symptoms of pneumonia include: a cough \u2013 which may be dry, or produce thick yellow, green, brown or blood-stained mucus (phlegm) difficulty breathing \u2013 your breathing may be rapid and shallow, and you may feel breathless, even when resting rapid heartbeat fever feeling generally unwell sweating and shivering loss of appetite chest pain \u2013 which gets worse when breathing or coughing Less common symptoms include: coughing up blood (haemoptysis) headaches fatigue nausea or vomiting wheezing joint and muscle pain feeling confused and disorientated, particularly in elderly people When to see your GP See your GP if you feel unwell and you have typical symptoms of pneumonia. Seek urgent medical attention if you're experiencing severe symptoms, such as rapid breathing, chest pain or confusion. Who's affected? In the UK, pneumonia affects around 8 in 1,000 adults each year. It's more widespread in autumn and winter. Pneumonia can affect people of any age, but it's more common \u2013 and can be more serious \u2013 in certain groups of people, such as the very young or the elderly. People in these groups are more likely to need hospital treatment if they develop pneumonia. What causes pneumonia? Pneumonia is usually the result of a pneumococcal infection, caused by bacteria called Streptococcus pneumoniae. Many different types of bacteria, including Haemophilus influenzae and Staphylococcus aureus, can also cause pneumonia, as well as viruses and, more rarely, fungi. As well as bacterial pneumonia, other types include: viral pneumonia \u2013 most commonly caused by the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and sometimes influenza type A or B; viruses are a common cause of pneumonia in young children aspiration pneumonia \u2013 caused by breathing in vomit, a foreign object, such as a peanut, or a harmful substance, such as smoke or a chemical fungal pneumonia \u2013 rare in the UK and more likely to affect people with a weakened immune system hospital-acquired pneumonia \u2013 pneumonia that develops in hospital while being treated for another condition or having an operation; people in intensive care on breathing machines are particularly at risk of developing ventilator-associated pneumonia Risk groups The following groups have an increased risk of developing pneumonia: babies and very young children elderly people people who smoke people with other health conditions, such as asthma, cystic fibrosis, or a heart, kidney or liver condition people with a weakened immune system \u2013 for example, as a result of a recent illness, such as flu, having HIV or AIDS, having chemotherapy, or taking medication following an organ transplant Diagnosing pneumonia Your GP may be able to diagnose pneumonia by asking about your symptoms and examining your chest. Further tests may be needed in some cases. Pneumonia can be difficult to diagnose because it shares many symptoms with other conditions, such as the common cold, bronchitis and asthma. To help make a diagnosis, your GP may ask you: whether you feel breathless or you're breathing faster than usual how long you've had your cough, and whether you're coughing up mucus and what colour it is if the pain in your chest is worse when you breathe in or out Your GP may also take your temperature and listen to your chest and back with a stethoscope to check for any crackling or rattling sounds. They may also listen to your chest by tapping it. Lungs filled with fluid produce a different sound from normal healthy lungs. If you have mild pneumonia, you probably won't need to have a chest X-ray or any other tests. You may need a chest X-ray or other tests, such as a sputum (mucus) test or blood tests, if your symptoms haven't improved within 48 hours of starting treatment. Treating pneumonia Mild pneumonia can usually be treated at home by: getting plenty of rest taking antibiotics drinking plenty of fluids If you don't have any other health problems, you should respond well to treatment and soon recover, although your cough may last for some time. As pneumonia isn't usually passed from one person to another, it's safe to be around others, including family members. However, people with a weakened immune system should avoid close contact with a person with pneumonia until they start to get better. For at-risk groups, pneumonia can be severe and may need to be treated in hospital. This is because it can lead to serious complications, which in some cases can be fatal, depending on a person's health and age. Read more about treating pneumonia. Complications of pneumonia Complications of pneumonia are more common in young children, the elderly and those with pre-existing health conditions, such as diabetes. Possible complications of pneumonia include: pleurisy \u2013 where the thin linings between your lungs and ribcage (pleura) become inflamed, which can lead to respiratory failure a lung abscess \u2013 a rare complication that's mostly seen in people with a serious pre-existing illness or a history of severe alcohol misuse blood poisoning (septicaemia) \u2013 also a rare but serious complication You'll be admitted to hospital for treatment if you develop one of these complications. Preventing pneumonia Although most cases of pneumonia are bacterial and aren't passed on from one person to another, ensuring good standards of hygiene will help prevent germs spreading. For example, you should: cover your mouth and nose with a handkerchief or tissue when you cough or sneeze  throw away used tissues immediately \u2013 germs can live for several hours after they leave your nose or mouth wash your hands regularly to avoid transferring germs to other people or objects A healthy lifestyle can also help prevent pneumonia. For example, you should avoid smoking as it damages your lungs and increases the chance of infection. Find out how to stop smoking. Excessive and prolonged alcohol misuse also weakens your lungs' natural defences against infections, making you more vulnerable to pneumonia. People at high risk of pneumonia should be offered the pneumococcal vaccine and flu vaccine. Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2016 Next review due: 11\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1419 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 699  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 405  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 167  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Pneumococcal disease Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Professor Brian Duerden, CBE, explains how pneumococcal disease can cause pneumonia and other invasive infections. He describes the effects of the disease on older people and children, and what you can do to prevent it. Media last reviewed: 23\/04\/2015 Next review due: 23\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Chest infection Pleurisy Pneumococcal infections Shortness of breath Stop smoking External links British Lung Foundation NHS Smokefree National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): diagnosis and management of pneumonia in adults Pneumococcal infections Pneumococcal infections are caused by the S. pneumoniae bacterium. Find out who's at risk and which vaccinations are available Pneumococcal vaccine The pneumococcal vaccination, also known as the pneumo jab, protects against pneumococcal infections Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Pneumonia Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Poisoning","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Poisoning","content":"Poisoning - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Poisoning  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Poisoning Clinical trials Poisoning Poisoning Symptoms Poisoning Treatment Poisoning Prevention Introduction  Poisoning is when a person is exposed to a substance that can damage their health or endanger their life. In 2013-14, almost 150,000 people were admitted to hospital with poisoning in England. Most cases of poisoning happen at home and children under five have the highest risk of accidental poisoning. In around one in four reported cases, the person intentionally poisoned themselves as a deliberate act of self-harm. Signs and symptoms of poisoning The symptoms of poisoning will depend on the type of poison and the amount taken in, but general things to look out for include: vomiting stomach pains confusion drowsiness and fainting fits If a child suddenly develops these symptoms, they may have been poisoned, particularly if they're drowsy and confused. What to do If you suspect that someone has taken an overdose or has been poisoned, don't try to treat them yourself. Get medical help immediately. Call NHS 111 for advice, if they don't appear to be seriously ill. If they're showing signs of being seriously ill, such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, drowsiness or seizures (fits), call 999 to request an ambulance or take the person to your local A&E department. In serious cases, it may be necessary for the person to stay in hospital for treatment. Most people admitted to hospital because of poisoning will survive. Read more about what to do if you think someone has been poisoned. Types of poisons Poisons can be swallowed, absorbed through the skin, inhaled, splashed into the eyes, or injected. A medication overdose is the most common form of poisoning in the UK. This can include both over-the-counter medications, such as paracetamol, and prescription medications, such as antidepressants. Other potential poisons include: household products, such as bleach cosmetic items, such as nail polish some types of plants and fungi certain types of household chemicals and pesticides carbon monoxide poorly prepared or cooked food, and food that's gone mouldy or been contaminated with bacteria from raw meat (food poisoning) alcohol, if an excessive amount is consumed over a short period of time (alcohol poisoning) recreational drugs or substances Snakes and insects, such as wasps and bees, aren't poisonous, but their bites or stings can contain venom (toxin). Read more about the causes of poisoning. Preventing poisoning There are several things you can do to reduce your or your child\u2019s risk of poisoning. These include carefully reading the patient information leaflet that comes with your medication, and ensuring that any poisonous substances are locked away out of the sight and reach of your children. Read more about preventing poisoning. Page last reviewed: 15\/06\/2015 Next review due: 15\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 50 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Alcohol poisoning Carbon monoxide poisoning Food poisoning Find A&E services Self-harm Signs of serious illness in children External links British Red Cross: poisoning and harmful substances Child Accident Prevention Trust: safety advice RoSPA: poisoning St John Ambulance: poisoning Food poisoning Find out about the causes and symptoms of food poisoning and what you can do to help your recovery Alcohol poisoning Alcohol poisoning is caused by drinking a toxic amount of alcohol, usually over a short amount of time, also known as binge drinking Carbon monoxide poisoning Carbon monoxide is known as the \"silent killer\" because it's a gas that you can't smell or taste. Find out how to protect your home and what to do if there's a leak NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polio","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polio","content":"Polio - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polio  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview polio Clinical trials Polio Introduction  Polio is a serious viral infection that used to be common in the UK and worldwide. It's rare nowadays because it can be prevented with vaccination. Most people with polio don't have any symptoms and won't know they're infected. But for up to 1 in 100 people, the polio virus causes temporary or permanent paralysis, which can be life-threatening. Cases of polio in the UK fell dramatically when routine vaccination was introduced in the mid-1950s. There hasn't been a case of polio caught in the UK since 1984, although the infection is still found in some parts of the world and there remains a very small risk that it could be brought back to the UK. There's no cure for polio, so it's important to make sure that you and your children are fully vaccinated against it. This page covers: Symptoms of polio Long-term problems caused by polio How do you get polio? Where is polio found? Treating polio Polio vaccination Symptoms of polio About 95% of people with polio won't have any symptoms and will fight off the infection without even realising they were infected. A small number of people will experience a flu-like illness 3 to 21 days after they're infected, with symptoms such as: a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above a sore throat  a headache abdominal (tummy) pain aching muscles feeling and being sick These symptoms will usually pass within about a week. In less than 1% of cases, the polio virus attacks the nerves in the spine and base of the brain. This can cause paralysis, usually in the legs, that develops over hours or days. The paralysis isn't usually permanent, and movement will often slowly return over the next few weeks and months. However, some people are left with persistent problems (see below) and if the breathing muscles are affected, it can be life-threatening. Long-term problems caused by polio Although polio often passes quickly without causing any other problems, it can sometimes lead to persistent or lifelong difficulties. About 1 in every 200 people with the infection will have some degree of permanent paralysis, and others may be left with problems that require long-term treatment and support, such as: muscle weakness shrinking of the muscles (atrophy) tight joints (contractures) deformities, such as twisted feet or legs There's also a chance that someone who has had polio in the past will develop similar symptoms again, or worsening of their existing symptoms, many decades later. This is known as post-polio syndrome. How do you get polio? You can become infected with the polio virus if you come into contact with the poo (faeces) of someone with the infection, or with the droplets launched into the air when they cough or sneeze. You can also get the infection from food or water that has been contaminated with infected poo or droplets. If the virus gets into your mouth, it travels to your throat and bowels, where it starts to multiply. In some cases, it can also get into the bloodstream and spread to the nervous system. The virus can be spread by someone with the infection from about a week before any symptoms develop, until several weeks afterwards. Infected people who don't have any symptoms can still pass polio on to others. There have been rare cases where polio has been caused by being vaccinated with a live version of the polio virus. This is no longer a risk in the UK, because the vaccine used nowadays contains an inactive version of the virus. Where is polio found? As a result of routine vaccination programmes, polio has been largely wiped out in most parts of the world. Areas declared polio-free by the World Health Organization (WHO) include Europe, the Americas, the Western Pacific region and, most recently, South East Asia. However, polio is found in some places. It's still a significant problem in Afghanistan, Nigeria and Pakistan, and there's a potential risk of infection in other parts of Africa and some Middle Eastern countries. You can use the country guide on the Travel Health Pro website to check if there's a risk of getting polio in a country you plan to visit. Treating polio There's currently no cure for polio. Treatment focuses on supporting bodily functions and reducing the risk of long-term problems while the body fights off the infection. This can include bed rest in hospital, painkillers, breathing support and regular stretches or exercises to prevent problems with the muscles and joints. If you're left with long-term problems as a result of a polio infection, you'll probably need ongoing treatment and support. This may include physiotherapy to help with any movement problems, devices such as splints and braces to support weak limbs or joints, occupational therapy to help you adapt to any difficulties, and possibly surgery to correct any deformities. Polio vaccination The polio vaccination is offered as part of the NHS routine childhood vaccination programme. It's given by injection in five separate doses. These are normally given at: eight, 12 and 16 weeks of age \u2013 as part of the 5-in-1 (DTaP\/IPV\/Hib) vaccine three years and four months of age \u2013 as part of the 4-in-1 (DTaP\/IPV) pre-school booster 14 years of age \u2013 as part of the 3-in-1 (Td\/IPV) teenage booster If you're planning to travel to a polio-affected country, you should get vaccinated if you've not been fully vaccinated before, or have a booster dose if it's been 10 years or more since your last dose of the vaccine. Read more about travel vaccinations. You can also get vaccinated at any point if you haven't been fully vaccinated before, even if you're not travelling somewhere where there's a risk of infection. If you've had polio in the past and haven't been vaccinated, it's still recommended that you get fully vaccinated. There are three types of polio virus that the vaccine protects against, and people who have had the infection before will only be immune to one of these. The polio vaccination is usually available for free on the NHS. Temporary precautions for travellers As the result of an increase in worldwide cases of polio during early 2014, the WHO has issued temporary additional travel recommendations for people visiting countries where polio is found. Depending on where you intend to travel, what you\u2019ll be doing there and how long you're staying for, you may now be advised to have a booster polio vaccination before travelling if you haven't had one in the past 12 months. Some of the countries where there's risk of infection will require proof of vaccination before you're permitted to travel elsewhere. If you don't have this, you may be given a booster dose before departing. Page last reviewed: 07\/09\/2015 Next review due: 07\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 29 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with disability NHS vaccination schedule Post-polio syndrome Travel vaccinations External links British Polio Fellowship Fit for Travel: polio Polio Survivors Network Travel Health Pro: polio When to have your vaccinations Find out which vaccinations are routinely offered on the NHS and at what age they are needed Travel vaccinations Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against Post-polio syndrome Read about post-polio syndrome, a condition that affects people many years after they've had a polio infection NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polipteal cyst","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Bakers-cyst","content":"Baker's cyst - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Baker's cyst  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Bakers-cyst Clinical trials Baker's cyst Bakers-cyst Treatment Introduction  A Baker's cyst, also called a popliteal cyst, is a fluid-filled swelling that develops at the back of the knee. It's caused when the tissue behind the knee joint becomes swollen and inflamed. The swelling and inflammation can cause: pain in the knee and calf a build-up of fluid around the knee occasional locking or clicking in the knee joint However, sometimes a Baker's cyst may not cause any symptoms other than the fluid-filled swelling at the back of the knee. In rare cases, a Baker's cyst can burst (rupture), resulting in fluid leaking down into your calf. This can cause sharp pain, swelling and redness in your calf. What causes a Baker's cyst? Knee damage caused by a sports-related injury or a blow to the knee can lead to a Baker's cyst developing. A Baker's cyst can also sometimes occur if you have a health condition such as: osteoarthritis \u2013 usually caused by age-related \"wear and tear\" of joints; it particularly affects the knees, hips, hands and big toe inflammatory arthritis \u2013 including rheumatoid arthritis which is a less common type of arthritis and is caused by the immune system attacking the joints gout \u2013 a type of arthritis that usually affects the big toe and is caused by a build-up of the waste product uric acid in the blood Baker's cysts are more common in women than men, probably because women are more likely to develop osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. They usually develop in people aged over 40, although can affect people of any age, including children. When to see your GP See your GP if you have a cyst that's causing problems and doesn't clear up on its own. They'll usually be able to diagnose a Baker's cyst by examining the back of your knee and asking about your symptoms. Your GP will ask you whether you have any associated health conditions, such as arthritis. Further tests may be recommended to rule out other more serious conditions, such as a tumour, an aneurysm (bulge in a section of a blood vessel) or deep vein thrombosis (DVT) (blood clot in one of the deep veins of the body). You may need an ultrasound scan or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. Treating a Baker's cyst Treatment won't usually be necessary if you have a Baker's cyst that isn't causing any symptoms. Over-the-counter painkillers can be used to reduce the swelling of a Baker's cyst and relieve any pain. Bandages or an ice pack may also help. A bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel works well as an ice pack. If you have an underlying condition that's causing your cyst, it's important that the condition is properly managed. The cyst may disappear when the condition causing it has been treated. In some cases, it may be possible to drain the cyst. Surgery may also be needed to repair any significant damage around the knee joint. Read more about treating a Baker's cyst. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2015 Next review due: 23\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 553 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 223  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthroscopy Cartilage damage Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Sports injuries External links Arthritis Care: living with arthritis Arthritis Research UK: osteoarthritis Lumps and swellings Most lumps and swellings are harmless but they should still be checked by a GP. Read more about different types of lumps and why they occur Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polyarteritis nodosa","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vasculitis\/Pages\/Introduction.aspx#polyarteritis","content":"Vasculitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vasculitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Vasculitis Introduction  Vasculitis literally means 'inflammation of the blood vessels'. Inflammation is your immune system's response to tissue that has become injured or infected. Damaged cells release chemicals that cause blood vessels to leak fluid into the tissues, causing tissue swelling. If there's an infection, this helps isolate the invading germ.  In vasculitis, your immune system attacks the blood vessels by mistake. The trigger may be an infection, a medicine or another medical condition. Sometimes, however, the cause isn't clear. It leads to swollen blood vessel walls and narrowed blood vessels. Blood flow to tissues and organs is reduced or blocked. If the blood vessel wall becomes weak, bleeding can occur. Any blood vessel can become inflamed like this, from large arteries (\"arteritis\") to small blood vessels, in any place in the body. The larger the blood vessels affected, the more damage there may be. All these variables mean there are many possible types of vasculitis, each with different symptoms and potential complications. These are covered below (ordered by size of the affected blood vessels): Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis) Polymyalgia rheumatica  Takayasu arteritis  Polyarteritis nodosa  Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis  Microscopic polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura  Less common types  These types of vasculitis are briefly explained below, with links taking you to more detailed information. Giant cell arteritis Giant cell arteritis is an age-related condition in which medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed. It's sometimes called \"temporal arteritis\", because the arteries around the temples are often affected. Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: aching and soreness around the temples jaw muscle pain while eating vision loss It tends to only affect adults over the age of 50, and the cause is unclear. The main treatment is steroid medication (usually prednisolone), which is given promptly when the diagnosis is suspected.  Read more about giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica  Polymyalgia rheumatica is another age-related condition closely related to giant cell arteritis. It causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips. It may also cause more general symptoms, such as a fever, extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, weight loss and depression. The condition is two to three times more common in women than men, and most people diagnosed with it are over 70 years old. The cause is unclear.  The main treatment is usually prednisolone (a steroid medication), which is usually used in lower doses than for giant cell arteritis.  Read more about polymyalgia rheumatica. Takayasu arteritis Takayasu arteritis is rare in the UK. The main artery from the heart is affected, along with the major arteries branching off this. These arteries gradually narrow over time, which reduces the blood supply to the limbs and other parts of the body. Treatment is usually steroid medication. Read information about Takayasu arteritis from Vasculitis UK. Polyarteritis nodosa Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare form of vasculitis, in which the medium or smaller arteries become damaged and inflamed. It particularly affects the arteries supplying the gut, kidneys and nerves. Sometimes, only part of the artery wall is affected, which becomes weak and may bulge, forming an aneurysm. If this leaks or ruptures, it can cause serious internal bleeding. Polyarteritis nodosa can also affect the whole wall of the artery at a particular point, and cause a blockage. The condition is potentially very serious. Typical symptoms are feeling unwell with fever, skin rashes, tummy aches, nerve damage and weight loss. Polyarteritis nodosa can sometimes be triggered by an infection, but the exact cause is uncertain. Read information about polyarteritis nodosa from the Great Ormond Street Hospital website. Kawasaki disease Kawasaki disease is a rare condition that affects small and medium arteries in children under the age of five.  The characteristic symptoms of Kawasaki disease are a high temperature that lasts for more than five days, with a rash, swollen glands in the neck, red fingers or toes, red eyes and redness of the lips, tongue or mouth. Kawasaki disease can affect the coronary arteries (the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart), so some children with Kawasaki disease experience heart complications. The trigger is thought to be an infection, although the exact cause is not fully understood. The affected child will usually need to be managed in hospital, because of the risk of complications \u2013 they will need to be carefully assessed for heart problems and treated with immunoglobulins and aspirin. Read more about Kawasaki disease. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener\u2019s granulomatosis)  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disorder that mainly affects the blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs and kidneys. It can cause a wide range of symptoms, including fever, night sweats, sinusitis, nosebleeds and crusting of the nose, shortness of breath, coughing up blood and kidney impairment. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a serious condition that can be fatal if left untreated, because it can lead to tissue damage and organ failure. High doses of drugs are needed to dampen down the immune system and bring the inflammation under control. Typically, it is treated with steroid medications (prednisone) and cyclophosphamide \u2013 a cancer drug that suppresses the immune system. Read more about granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome) Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a type of vasculitis that typically causes allergic sinusitis and asthma to develop in adults. It mainly affects adults aged 30-45. Many of the other symptoms are general and include fever, muscle and joint aches, tiredness, loss of appetite and weight loss. The condition can also affect the nerves, causing weakness, pins and needles or numbness, and it sometimes damages the heart muscle. Read information about Eosinophilic granulomatosis from Vasculitis UK. Microscopic polyangiitis Microscopic polyangiitis is another rare and potentially serious long-term vasculitis. Inflammation of the blood vessel walls may affect any organ, but particularly the lungs, kidneys and nervous system. It can lead to raised blood pressure, kidney impairment, anaemia, breathlessness and coughing up blood.  Read information from the Oxford University Hospitals NHS website about microscopic polyangiitis. Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura (HSP) Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a rare condition, usually seen in children, which results in a skin rash and joint and tummy pain. It can follow a recent infection. Inflammation of the blood vessels can cause the small surface blood vessels to bleed into the skin, which results in a characteristic rash (purpura). Joint pain is also common. HSP can also affect blood vessels in the bowel and the kidneys, and can cause tummy pain and visible blood in the urine or stools. HSP usually gets better without treatment and is not usually serious. Read more about Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Less common types of vasculitis  Behçet's disease \u2013 typically results in mouth ulcers and genital ulcers, and is more common in people from Greece, Turkey, the Middle East, China and Japan Buerger's disease (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 affects vessels in the legs and arms, leading to reduced blood flow to the hands and feet Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the brain's blood vessels Cogan's Syndrome (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 inflammation of the inner ears and eyes Cryoglobulin-associated vasculitis (links to the Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 associated with cryoglobulins (proteins in the blood that stick together in the cold); can cause a rash on the lower limbs, joint pain or arthritis, nerve damage, abdominal pain and kidney failure Hypersensitivity vasculitis (links to Vasculitis UK website) \u2013 most commonly caused by sensitivity to a drug such as penicillin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or the contraceptive pill, and results in a skin rash  Vasculitis caused by rheumatoid arthritis (links to the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society) The links take you to more information on these rarer types of vasculitis. Arm of a 56-year-old woman with small vessel vasculitis (inflammation of the capillaries)  Why you should avoid smoking Smoking makes the blood vessels become even narrower than they already are, and can therefore make vasculitis symptoms worse. Get help now to stop smoking. Page last reviewed: 23\/09\/2014 Next review due: 23\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 69 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Giant cell arteritis Polymyalgia rheumatica Kawasaki disease Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Henoch\u2013Schönlein purpura External links Vasculitis UK Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polycystic kidney disease, autosomal dominant (ADPKD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease","content":"Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Clinical trials Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Community Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Symptoms Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Diagnosis Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Treatment Autosomal-dominant-polycystic-kidney-disease Complications   Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is an inherited condition that causes small, fluid-filled sacs called cysts to develop in the kidneys. Although children affected by ADPKD are born with the condition, it rarely causes any noticeable problems until the cysts grow large enough to affect the kidneys' functions. In most cases, this doesn't occur until a person is between 30 and 60 years of age. Less commonly, children or older people may have noticeable symptoms as a result of ADPKD. When ADPKD reaches this stage, it can cause a wide range of problems, including: abdominal (tummy) pain high blood pressure (hypertension)  blood in the urine (haematuria) \u2013 which may not always be noticeable to the naked eye potentially serious upper urinary tract infections (UTIs) kidney stones Kidney function will gradually deteriorate until so much is lost that kidney failure occurs. Read more about the symptoms of ADPKD and diagnosing ADPKD. What causes ADPKD? ADPKD is caused by a genetic fault that disrupts the normal development of some of the cells in the kidneys and causes cysts to grow. Faults in one of two different genes are known to cause ADPKD. The affected genes are: PKD1 \u2013 which accounts for 85% of cases PKD2 \u2013 which accounts for 15% of cases Both types of ADPKD have the same symptoms, but they tend to be more severe in PKD1. A child has a one in two (50%) chance of developing ADPKD if one of their parents has the faulty PKD1 or PKD2 gene. Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a rarer type of kidney disease which can only be inherited if both parents carry the faulty gene and in this type problems usually start much earlier, during childhood. Non-inherited ADPKD In around one in four (25%) cases, a person develops ADPKD without having a known family history of the condition. This could be because the condition was never diagnosed in a relative, or a relative with the condition may have died before their symptoms were recognised. In around one in 10 cases of ADPKD, the mutation develops for the first time in the affected person. It's not known what causes this to happen. The affected person can pass the faulty gene on to their children in the same way as someone who's inherited it from a parent (see above). Who's affected ADPKD is the most common inherited condition to affect the kidneys, although it's still relatively uncommon. Only around one or two in every 1,000 people are born with ADPKD, which means there are currently around 60,000 people in the UK with the condition. Treating ADPKD There's currently no cure for ADPKD, but various treatments are available to manage problems caused by the condition. Most problems \u2013 such as high blood pressure, pain and UTIs \u2013 can be treated with medication, although you may need to have an operation to remove any large kidney stones that develop. If the condition reaches a point where the kidneys aren't able to function properly, there are two main treatment options: dialysis \u2013 where a machine is used to replicate kidney functions kidney transplant \u2013 where a healthy kidney is removed from a living or recently deceased donor and implanted into someone with kidney failure In some cases of ADPKD in adults (where chronic kidney disease is advanced and progressing rapidly), a medication called tolvaptan can be used to slow down the formation of cysts and protect kidney function. Read more about treating ADPKD. Outlook The outlook for ADPKD is highly variable. Some people experience kidney failure soon after the condition is diagnosed, whereas others may live the rest of their life with their kidneys working relatively well. On average, around half of people with ADPKD require treatment for kidney failure by the time they're 60. As well as kidney failure, ADPKD can also cause a number of other potentially serious problems, such as heart attacks and strokes caused by high blood pressure, or bleeding on the brain (subarachnoid haemorrhage) caused by a bulge in the wall of a blood vessel in the brain (brain aneurysm). Read more about the complications of ADPKD. Information about you If you have ADPKD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. The kidneys The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs located on either side of the back of the body, just underneath the ribcage. The main role of the kidneys is to filter out waste products from the blood and pass them out of the body in urine. The kidneys also play an important role in: helping to maintain blood pressure at a healthy level keeping salt and water in balance making hormones needed for the production of blood and bone Page last reviewed: 11\/05\/2016 Next review due: 11\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 119 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease Chronic kidney disease Dialysis High blood pressure Kidney transplant External links infoKID: information about children's kidney conditions Kidney Research UK National Kidney Federation PKD Charity Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Advice for new patients with kidney disease Lifestyle tips for new kidney disease patients plus the vaccinations and medicines you may need Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polycystic kidney disease, autosomal recessive (ARPKD)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease","content":"Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease Clinical trials Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease Symptoms Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease Causes Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease Diagnosis Autosomal-recessive-polycystic-kidney-disease Treatment   Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a rare inherited childhood condition, where the development of the kidneys and liver is abnormal. Over time, either one of these organs may fail. The condition often causes serious problems soon after birth, although less severe cases may not become obvious until a child is older. ARPKD can cause a wide range of problems, including: underdeveloped lungs, which can cause severe breathing difficulties soon after birth high blood pressure (hypertension) excessive peeing and thirst problems with blood flow through the liver, which can lead to serious internal bleeding a progressive loss of kidney function, known as chronic kidney disease (CKD)  When these problems develop, and how severe they are, can vary considerably \u2013 even between family members with the condition. Read more about the symptoms of ARPKD and diagnosing ARPKD. Even though ARPKD is rare, it's one of the most common kidney problems to affect young children. It's estimated that around 1 in 20,000 babies is born with the condition. Both boys and girls are affected equally. What causes ARPKD? ARPKD is caused by a genetic fault that disrupts normal development of the kidneys and liver. In particular, the growth and development of the small tubes that make up the kidneys is affected, causing bulges and cysts (fluid-filled sacs) to develop within them. Over time, the cysts cause the kidneys to become enlarged and scarred (fibrosis), resulting in the deterioration of overall kidney function. Similar problems also affect the small tubes (bile ducts) that allow bile (a digestive fluid) to flow out of the liver. The bile ducts may develop abnormally and cysts may grow inside them. The liver can also become scarred over time. ARPKD is caused by a genetic alteration in the gene PKHD1, which in most cases is passed on to a child by their parents. If both parents carry a faulty version of this gene, there's a one in four (25%) chance of each child they have developing ARPKD. The way ARPKD is inherited is different from a more common type of kidney disease called autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), which usually doesn't cause significantly reduced kidney function until adulthood. ADPKD can be inherited if only one parent carries one of the genetic faults responsible for the condition. Read more about the causes of ARPKD. Treating ARPKD There's currently no cure for ARPKD, but various treatments can help manage the wide range of problems it can cause. Treatment for ARPKD may include: breathing assistance with a ventilator (a machine that moves air in and out of the lungs) for children with severe breathing difficulties medication to treat high blood pressure procedures to stop any internal bleeding that may occur medications to control problems associated with the loss of kidney function, such as iron supplements for anaemia. More than half of all children who survive the early stages of ARPKD will eventually experience kidney failure by the time they're 15 to 20 years old. If kidney failure does occur, there are two main treatment options: dialysis \u2013 where a machine is used to replicate many functions of the kidney kidney transplant \u2013 where a healthy kidney is removed from a living or recently deceased donor and implanted into someone with kidney failure Read more about the treatment of ARPKD. Outlook The outlook for children with ARPKD can vary considerably, depending on the severity of the condition. If routine scans pick up kidney problems during pregnancy, the baby will usually have a poorer outlook than a child who's diagnosed at a later stage. However, in general, ARPKD is a severe condition and around one in three babies will die from severe breathing difficulties during the first four weeks after birth. About eight or nine out of 10 babies (80-90%) with ARPKD who survive the first month of life will live until they're at least five years old. It's difficult to predict exactly how long a child with ARPKD will live because there's very little data showing long-term survival rates. However, with advances in treatments and a better understanding of the condition, increasing numbers of children with ARPKD are living well into adulthood. Information about you If you have ARPKD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. The kidneys The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs located on either side of the body, just beneath the ribcage. The main role of the kidneys is to filter out waste products from the blood before passing them out of the body as urine. The kidneys also help maintain blood pressure at a healthy level. Page last reviewed: 25\/04\/2016 Next review due: 25\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 18 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Chronic kidney disease Dialysis High blood pressure Kidney transplant Kidney health Living with kidney disease External links Genetic Alliance UK infoKID Kidney Research UK National Kidney Federation PKD Charity: ARPKD guide for parents Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Helping your child live with kidney disease Tips for parents of children with kidney disease, including making friends and taking medicines NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polycystic ovary syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome","content":"Polycystic ovary syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polycystic ovary syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Clinical trials Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Community Polycystic ovary syndrome Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Symptoms Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Causes Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Diagnosis Polycystic-ovarian-syndrome Treatment   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common condition that affects how a woman\u2019s ovaries work. The three main features of PCOS are: irregular periods \u2013 which means your ovaries don't regularly release eggs (ovulation) excess androgen \u2013 high levels of \"male hormones\" in your body, which may cause physical signs such as excess facial or body hair (see signs and symptoms below) polycystic ovaries \u2013 your ovaries become enlarged and contain many fluid-filled sacs (follicles) which surround the eggs (it's important to note that, despite the name, if you have PCOS you don't actually have cysts) If you have at least two of these features you may be diagnosed with PCOS. Read more about diagnosing PCOS. Polycystic ovaries Polycystic ovaries contain a large number of harmless follicles that are up to 8mm (approximately 0.3in) in size. The follicles are under-developed sacs in which eggs develop. In PCOS, these sacs are often unable to release an egg, which means that ovulation doesn't take place. It's difficult to know exactly how many women have PCOS, but it's thought to be very common affecting about one in every five women in the UK. More than half of these women don't have any symptoms. Signs and symptoms If you do have signs and symptoms of PCOS, they'll usually become apparent during your late teens or early twenties. They can include: irregular periods or no periods at all difficulty getting pregnant as a result of irregular ovulation or failure to ovulate excessive hair growth (hirsutism) \u2013 usually on the face, chest, back or buttocks weight gain thinning hair and hair loss from the head oily skin or acne   PCOS is also associated with an increased risk of developing health problems in later life, such as type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol levels. What causes PCOS? The exact cause of PCOS is unknown, but it often runs in families. It's related to abnormal hormone levels in the body, including high levels of insulin. Insulin is a hormone that controls sugar levels in the body. Many women with PCOS are resistant to the action of insulin in their body and produce higher levels of insulin to overcome this. This contributes to the increased production and activity of hormones such as testosterone. Being overweight or obese also increases the amount of insulin your body produces. Read more about the causes of PCOS. Treating PCOS There's no cure for PCOS, but the symptoms can be treated. Speak to your GP if you think you may have the condition. If you have PCOS and you're overweight, losing weight and eating a healthy, balanced diet can make some symptoms better. Medications are also available to treat symptoms such as excessive hair growth, irregular periods and fertility problems. If fertility medications are ineffective, a simple surgical procedure called laparoscopic ovarian drilling (LOD) may be recommended. This involves using heat or a laser to destroy the tissue in the ovaries that's producing androgens, such as testosterone. With treatment, most women with PCOS are able to get pregnant. Read more about treating PCOS. Page last reviewed: 18\/03\/2016 Next review due: 18\/03\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 595 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 299  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 147  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 64  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Absent periods Acne Fertility Hirsutism Irregular periods Lose weight Ovarian cyst External links Lab Tests Online UK: LH test PCOS UK Verity: PCOS charity Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Fertility Find out about the treatments and support available if you have fertility problems Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Polycystic ovary syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polycythaemia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polycythaemia","content":"Polycythaemia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polycythaemia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview polycythaemia Clinical trials polycythaemia Community Polycythaemia   Polycythaemia, or erythrocytosis, means having a high concentration of red blood cells in your blood. This makes the blood thicker and less able to travel through blood vessels and organs. Many of the symptoms of polycythaemia are caused by this sluggish flow of blood.  Symptoms of polycythaemia Mild cases of polycythaemia may not cause any problems, but some people with polycythaemia can experience: headaches blurred vision red skin \u2013 particularly in the face, hands and feet  tiredness high blood pressure  dizziness discomfort in the tummy (abdomen) periods of confusion bleeding problems \u2013 such as nosebleeds and bruising gout \u2013 which can cause joint pain, stiffness and swelling itchy skin \u2013 especially after a bath or shower; this is the result of white blood cells (levels of which can also be high) releasing the chemical histamine  You should make an appointment to see your GP if you have persistent symptoms of polycythaemia. When to seek immediate medical advice The slow blood flow associated with polycythaemia can also cause blood clots. These can be serious because they may put you at risk of life-threatening problems such as: heart attacks pulmonary embolisms \u2013 a blockage in the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs strokes In some cases, a blood clot \u2013 known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT) \u2013 may form in your leg, before moving elsewhere in your body. Signs of DVT or a pulmonary embolism can include: pain, swelling, redness and tenderness in one of your legs a heavy ache in the affected area warm skin in the area of the clot breathlessness chest or upper back pain coughing up blood feeling lightheaded or dizzy fainting If you experience any of the above symptoms, seek medical help immediately. You should also seek emergency medical help if you think that you or someone you're with is having a heart attack or stroke. What causes polycythaemia? Polycythaemia can be divided into several different types, depending on the underlying cause of the condition. In some cases, an underlying cause can't be identified. Apparent polycythaemia \"Apparent polycythaemia\" is where your red cell count is normal, but you have a reduced amount of a fluid called plasma in your blood, making it thicker. The condition is often caused by being overweight, smoking, drinking excessive amounts of alcohol or taking certain medications \u2013 such as diuretics. A similar condition that's sometimes called \"relative polycythaemia\" can also occur as a result of dehydration. Apparent polycythaemia may improve if the underlying cause is identified and managed. Stopping smoking or reducing your alcohol intake, for example, may help. Absolute polycythaemia \"Absolute polycythaemia\" is where your body produces too many red blood cells. There are two main types: primary polycythaemia \u2013 there's a problem in the cells produced by the bone marrow that become red blood cells; the most common type is known as polycythaemia vera (PV) secondary polycythaemia \u2013 too many red blood cells are produced as the result of an underlying condition Both PV and secondary polycythaemia are described in more detail below. Polycythaemia vera (PV) PV is a rare condition usually caused by a fault in the JAK2 gene, which causes the bone marrow cells to produce too many red blood cells. The affected bone marrow cells can also develop into other cells found in the blood, which means that people with PV may also have abnormally high numbers of both platelets (thrombocytosis) and white bloods cells (leukocytosis). Although caused by a genetic fault, PV isn't usually inherited. Most cases develop later in life, with 60 the average age of diagnosis. Secondary polycythaemia Secondary polycythaemia is where an underlying condition causes more erythropoietin to be produced. This is a hormone produced by the kidneys that stimulates the bone marrow cells to produce red blood cells. Conditions that can cause secondary polycythaemia include: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and sleep apnoea \u2013 these can cause an increase in erythropoietin, due to not enough oxygen reaching the body's tissues a problem with the kidneys \u2013 such as a kidney tumour or narrowing of the arteries supplying blood to the kidneys How polycythaemia is diagnosed Polycythaemia can be diagnosed by carrying out a blood test to check: the number of red blood cells in your blood (red blood cell count) the amount of space the red blood cells take up in the blood (haematocrit level) A high concentration of red blood cells suggests you have polycythaemia. Your GP may have ordered a blood test because you reported some of the above symptoms or complications, but polycythaemia is sometimes only discovered during a routine blood test for another reason. Your GP may refer you to a haematologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the blood) for more tests, to confirm the diagnosis and to determine the underlying cause. These may include a blood test to look for the faulty JAK2 gene and an ultrasound scan of your abdomen to look for problems in your kidneys. Treating polycythaemia Treatment for polycythaemia aims to prevent symptoms and complications (such as blood clots), and treat any underlying causes. Some of the main treatments used are described below. Venesection Venesection is the simplest and quickest way of reducing the number of red cells in your blood. It may be recommended if you have PV, a history of blood clots, or symptoms suggesting your blood is too thick (see above). Venesection involves removing about one pint (half a litre) of blood at a time, in a similar way to the procedure used for blood donation. How often this is needed will be different for each person. At first, you may need the treatment every week, but once your condition is under control you may only need it every 6-12 weeks or less. For more information, read an NHS leaflet on having a venesection (PDF, 335kb).  Medication to reduce the production of red blood cells In cases of PV, medication may be prescribed to slow down the production of red blood cells. Many different medications are available and your specialist will take into account your age and health, response to venesection and red blood cell count when choosing the most appropriate one for you. Examples include: hydroxycarbamide \u2013 generally tolerated well, but shouldn't be taken by pregnant women or women trying to conceive interferon \u2013 can be taken in pregnancy, but may cause unpleasant side effects, such as hair loss and flu-like symptoms Medication to prevent blood clots If you have PV, daily low-dose aspirin tablets may be prescribed to help prevent blood clots and reduce the risk of serious complications. You may also be offered treatment with low-dose aspirin if you have apparent or secondary polycythaemia and another condition affecting your blood vessels, such as coronary heart disease or cerebrovascular disease. Treating and preventing other conditions Some people may also need treatment for any other symptoms or complications of polycythaemia they have, or for any underlying cause of the condition. For example, you may be given medication to help relieve itching, manage COPD or treat gout. Read more about: treatments for itching treating COPD  treating gout Lifestyle changes As well as improving some cases of apparent polycythaemia, making healthy lifestyle changes can also reduce your risk of potentially serious blood clots for people with all types of polycythaemia. Having polycythaemia means you're already at high risk of a blood clot, and being overweight or smoking only increases this risk. You may find the following advice and information helpful: losing weight  healthy weight calculator  preventing cardiovascular disease  managing high blood pressure  stopping smoking  Outlook The outlook for polycythaemia largely depends on the underlying cause. Many cases are mild and may not lead to any further complications. However, some cases \u2013 particularly cases of PV \u2013 can be more serious and require long-term treatment. If well controlled, polycythaemia shouldn't affect your life expectancy, and you should be able to live a normal life. However, people with PV can have a slightly lower life expectancy than normal due to the increased risk of problems, such as heart attacks and strokes. PV can also sometimes cause scarring of the bone marrow (myelofibrosis), which can eventually lead to you having too few blood cells. In some rare cases, the condition can develop into a type of cancer called acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). If you have polycythaemia, it's important to take any medication you're prescribed and keep an eye out for signs of possible blood clots to help reduce your risk of serious complications. Information about you If you have polycythaemia, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 26\/05\/2016 Next review due: 26\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 335 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 182  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 86  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood tests Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Pulmonary embolism Heart attack Stroke External links Lab Tests Online UK: red blood cell count Cancer Research UK: PV MPN Voice Itching Itching is a common symptom that can be caused by a number of conditions. Find out why it happens and what you can do about it VTE self-assessment Use this self-assessment tool to help determine your risk of developing a blood clot Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polyhydramnios (too much amniotic fluid)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polyhydramnios","content":"Polyhydramnios - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polyhydramnios (too much amniotic fluid)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview polyhydramnios Polyhydramnios Introduction  Polyhydramnios is a common complication of pregnancy, where there's an excessive amount of amniotic fluid surrounding the unborn baby (foetus). An abnormal amount of fluid (whether increased or reduced) might be suspected by your healthcare professional after 30 weeks of pregnancy, during one of your antenatal appointments, and should be monitored and investigated. The cause of polyhydramnios is often unknown, but sometimes indicates a problem with the baby's development (see What are the causes?, below). However, most women with polyhydramnios give birth to healthy babies. If you're pregnant and notice your belly is getting large very quickly (acute polyhydramnios), contact your doctor or midwife. It's rare for it to happen suddenly, but it can indicate an abnormality with the foetus and increases your risk of giving birth prematurely. This page covers: How is polyhydramnios diagnosed?  What are the causes?  What associated risks should I be aware of?  How is it investigated and managed?  How is polyhydramnios diagnosed?  In most women with polyhydramnios, the excess fluid builds up slowly. After 30 weeks of pregnancy, this excess fluid should be noticeable and picked up by your GP, midwife or obstetrician during one of your antenatal appointments. In rare cases, when polyhydramnios develops very quickly, the excess fluid may be apparent earlier in pregnancy, or might be noted at the time of the detailed scan at 18-22 weeks. If increased amniotic fluid is suspected, you may be referred for an ultrasound scan, so that the depth of the amniotic fluid surrounding the foetus can be measured. What are the causes?  Often, no cause can be found for polyhydramnios. However, it can be associated with any of the following: The mother carrying twins (read about giving birth to twins).  The mother having diabetes, including gestational diabetes (pregnancy-related diabetes). Sometimes, if diabetes is the cause, the baby will be larger than expected for its stage of development. A blockage in part of the baby's gut (a condition called gut atresia), which prevents them absorbing the usual amount of amniotic fluid. A gut atresia would often require an operation after the baby's birth (read more about gut atresia in babies). The mother having rhesus disease, where antibodies in the mother's blood cross the placenta, sometimes causing anaemia in the foetus.   A growth of blood vessels on the placenta, called a chorioangioma. A build-up of fluid in specific areas of the baby's body, such as the abdomen and chest cavity, called hydrops fetalis. A genetic problem with the foetus. What associated risks should I be aware of?  Having polyhydramnios means there's a slightly higher risk of your unborn baby having a birth defect, especially if the fluid build-up is severe. You should discuss with your healthcare professionals any other problems that the extra fluid could be linked to. However, don't panic \u2013 the vast majority of women with polyhydramnios give birth to healthy babies. Your labour may be affected in the following ways: You may go into premature labour because of the additional pressure stretching the womb. Your baby may be in the wrong position and you may need a caesarean section. If your baby is in the wrong position, the umbilical cord may slip down into the birth canal when the membranes rupture (read more about a prolapsed umbilical cord). You may have an increased risk of bleeding after delivery. How is it investigated and managed?  Most women with polyhydramnios need an ultrasound investigation and a glucose tolerance test, to try to identify a cause and check for gestational diabetes.  If your condition isn't severe, this can be done in the GP's surgery and you may not need to be admitted to hospital. Read more about ultrasound scans in pregnancy. If the ultrasound scan appears to show a problem with the foetus, doctors might discuss whether you want to have amniocentesis (where a sample of fluid is drawn out using a needle), to test for chromosomal or genetic problems in the foetus.  Your doctor may also recommend a period of bed rest to help reduce your risk of giving birth prematurely, if you're at risk. During and after labour Your doctors and midwives will usually recommend giving birth to the baby in hospital, where more emergency treatment options are available. They may also recommend close monitoring of the baby's heart rate in labour. If your baby appears normal after birth, your doctor might suggest passing a tube down your baby's throat to check them for internal problems, such as a problem with the development of their gullet (oesophageal atresia). Read general information about your baby after the birth. Amniotic fluid: what does it do?  During pregnancy, the unborn baby (foetus) floats inside a fluid-filled sac in the womb. Amniotic fluid has several important roles: it protects the foetus from outside injury by cushioning sudden blows and movements it helps the foetus to move in the womb, allowing for proper bone growth it helps the foetus' lungs develop properly it keeps the temperature relatively constant around the foetus The fluid constantly moves around as the foetus swallows it and releases it through urine.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/03\/2015 Next review due: 19\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 93 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Caesarean section External links National Childbirth Trust Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Get weekly pregnancy and baby emails, linking to articles and over 100 videos of experts, mums and dads Gestational diabetes Find out about gestational diabetes, a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy and normally disappears after giving birth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polymorphic light eruption","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polymorphic-light-eruption","content":"Polymorphic light eruption - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polymorphic light eruption  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polymorphic light eruption Introduction  Polymorphic light eruption is a fairly common skin rash triggered by exposure to sunlight or artificial ultraviolet (UV) light. An itchy or burning rash appears within hours, or up to two to three days after exposure to sunlight. It lasts for up to two weeks, healing without scarring. The rash usually appears on the parts of the skin exposed to sunlight \u2013 typically the head and neck, chest and arms (the face isn't always affected). Polymorphic light eruption is thought to affect about 10-15% of the UK population. What does the rash look like? The rash can take many different forms (known as being \"polymorphic\"): most people get crops of 2-5mm pink or red raised spots  some people get blisters that turn into larger, dry red patches (looks a bit like eczema) less commonly, the skin patches look like targets or bulls-eyes, a bit like the skin rash erythema multiforme It can be easy to mistake polymorphic light eruption for prickly heat. Prickly heat is caused by warm weather or overheating, rather than sunlight or UV light. The skin in prickly heat doesn't \"harden\" or desensitise, as it can do in polymorphic light eruption (see information on desensitisation below). How big a problem is it? The skin rash may be a rare occurrence, or may happen every time the skin is exposed to sunlight. It ranges from mild to severe. Sometimes, as little as 30 minutes of sun exposure is enough to cause the problem, and it can develop even through window glass or thin clothing. However, for most people with polymorphic light eruption, the rash develops after several hours outside on a sunny day. If further sun is avoided, the rash may settle and go without a trace within a couple of weeks. It may or may not return when skin is re-exposed to sunlight. If the skin is exposed to more sunlight before the rash has cleared up, it will probably get much worse and spread. For many affected people, the skin rash appears every spring and remains a problem throughout summer, settling by autumn. Who's affected? Polymorphic light eruption is more common in women than men. It particularly affects those who are fair, although it can affect those with dark skin. It usually starts from the ages of 20 to 40, although it sometimes affects children. What is the cause? Polymorphic light eruption is thought to be caused by UV light altering a substance in the skin, which the immune system then reacts to, resulting in the skin becoming inflamed. Polymorphic light eruption can run in families and about a fifth of affected people will have an affected relative. It's not infectious \u2013 there's no risk of catching polymorphic light eruption from another person. How is it treated? There's no cure for polymorphic light eruption, but careful avoidance of the sun and using sunscreens will help you manage the rash.  Generally, avoid the sun between 11am and 3pm, and wear protective clothing when outdoors (unless you're hardening your skin; see below). Introduce your skin to sunlight gradually in the spring. Sunscreen You may be prescribed sunscreens, which may prevent the rash developing. Use a sunscreen that is SPF 30 or above with a good UVA rating. Apply it thickly and evenly, reapplying often. Watch a video on how to apply sunscreen. Steroid creams and ointments  Your GP can prescribe corticosteroid (steroid) cream or ointment, to be applied only when the rash appears. You should apply this sparingly, as often as your GP advises, and never when there's no rash. Desensitisation or UV treatment Sometimes you can increase the resistance of your skin to the sun. This involves visiting a hospital department three times a week for four to six weeks in the spring. Your skin is gradually exposed to a little more UV light every visit, to try to build up your skin's resistance. The effects of desensitisation are lost in the winter, so you'll have to build up your resistance again in the spring. Hardening or toughening You may be able to increase the resistance of your skin at home, which is known as \"hardening\". This involves going outside for short periods in the spring to build up your resistance. You might find the time is as short as a few minutes at first, but you may be able to gradually build up to longer times. You'll have to be careful not to overdo it, but as you understand more about how much light triggers your rash, you'll be able to judge how long to stay out. The effects of hardening are lost in the winter, so you'll have to build up your resistance again in the spring. Vitamin D People with polymorphic light eruption are at greater risk of vitamin D deficiency, as a certain amount of sun exposure is needed to make your own vitamin D. Your GP will advise whether you need treatment with vitamin D supplements. What's the outlook? Many people with polymorphic light eruption find the skin complaint improves over years \u2013 the skin may harden (become more resistant to sunlight) during the summer, which means more and more sun can be tolerated without the skin reacting. It may even eventually clear up on its own, although this is unusual. However, hardening of the skin doesn't always happen, and some people with very sensitive skin may even get the rash in the winter. For these people, it may be a long-term condition to manage with lifestyle changes and creams.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/06\/2015 Next review due: 01\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Prickly heat Steroid cream External links British Association of Dermatologists Topical corticosteroids Topical corticosteroids are creams, gels and ointments used to treat a number of skin conditions Sunscreen and other sun safety advice How to keep safe from sun damage (including from sunbeds) and reduce the risk of skin cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polymyalgia rheumatica","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polymyalgia-rheumatica","content":"Polymyalgia rheumatica - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polymyalgia rheumatica  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polymyalgia-rheumatica Clinical trials Polymyalgia-rheumatica Community Polymyalgia rheumatica Polymyalgia-rheumatica Symptoms Polymyalgia-rheumatica Diagnosis Polymyalgia-rheumatica Treatment Introduction  Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) is a condition that causes pain, stiffness and inflammation in the muscles around the shoulders, neck and hips. The main symptom is muscle stiffness in the morning that lasts longer than 45 minutes. It may also cause other symptoms, including: high temperature (fever) and sweating extreme tiredness (fatigue) loss of appetite weight loss depression If you have pain and stiffness that lasts longer than a week, you should see your GP so the cause can be investigated. Diagnosing polymyalgia rheumatica can be difficult because the symptoms are similar to those of many other conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis. These conditions will need to be ruled out before polymyalgia rheumatica is diagnosed. Read more about the symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica and diagnosing polymyalgia rheumatica. What causes polymyalgia rheumatica? The cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown, but a combination of genetic and environmental factors is thought to be responsible. Polymyalgia rheumatica is relatively common in the UK. It's estimated that one in every 1,200 people develop the condition every year. Polymyalgia rheumatica is age-related. Most people who are diagnosed with the condition are over 70. It's extremely rare in people younger than 50. It's also more common in women than men. Treating polymyalgia rheumatica The main treatment for polymyalgia rheumatica is a coritcosteroid medication called prednisolone, which is used to help relieve the symptoms. You'll initially be prescribed a high dose of prednisolone, which will be reduced gradually over time. Most people with polymyalgia rheumatica will need to take a long-term course of corticosteroid treatment (lasting 18 months to two years) to prevent their symptoms returning. Read more about treating polymyalgia rheumatica. Giant cell arteritis Around one in five people with polymyalgia rheumatica develop a more serious condition called giant cell arteritis (also known as temporal arteritis), which can cause inflammation in the arteries of the head or neck, resulting in symptoms such as: persistent severe headaches with scalp tenderness (the scalp is sore to touch) pain in the jaw muscles when chewing impaired vision, such as double vision or loss of vision You should contact your GP immediately if you notice these symptoms. Unlike polymyalgia rheumatica, giant cell arteritis requires immediate medical assistance and without prompt treatment it can cause permanent visual impairment. The symptoms of giant cell arteritis can develop before, after or at the same time as the symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica. Page last reviewed: 20\/01\/2015 Next review due: 20\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 946 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 404  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 293  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 141  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Giant cell arteritis Neck pain or stiff neck External links Arthritis Care: PMR Arthritis Research UK: self-help and daily living for PMR PMRGCAUK: what is PMR? Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory medicines prescribed to treat a wide range of health conditions Giant cell arteritis Giant cell arteritis is a condition where medium and large arteries, usually in the head and neck, become inflamed Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polymyositis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/myositis","content":"Myositis (polymyositis and dermatomyositis) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Myositis (polymyositis and dermatomyositis)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Myositis Introduction  Myositis is a general term that means \"inflammation of the muscles\". The symptoms are muscle weakness, tripping or falling, and fatigue (tiredness) after walking or standing. It can feel like permanently having the flu. If the throat or chest muscles are affected, it can cause difficulty swallowing or breathing. Myositis can result from infection, certain medications or, most commonly, an underlying problem with the immune system. Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are types of myositis caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking the muscles as if they were invading germs. When the immune system attacks the body in this way, it's known as an autoimmune disease. What is dermatomyositis, and who is at risk? Dermatomyositis affects the skin as well as the muscles, and sometimes also affects the joints, lungs and heart. It causes skin rashes on the face and on the back of the hands. The muscles may feel painful and tender. Dermatomyositis is usually an autoimmune disease, but it is not known why the immune system malfunctions in this way. It can be associated with other autoimmune diseases, too, such as thyroid disease and diabetes, and can also be associated with cancer.  Dermatomyositis can affect adults or children, and is more common in women. There's no cure, but symptoms can be treated with medication. What is polymyositis, and who is at risk? Polymyositis affects many different muscles in the body, especially the shoulders, hips and thigh muscles, but there's no skin rash. The muscle weakness may vary from week to week or month to month, although it tends to steadily get worse without treatment. It can be difficult to get up from a chair, climb stairs, lift objects, and comb hair. The aching and muscle weakness can become so severe that even picking up a cup of tea is difficult. If neck muscles are affected, it may be difficult to hold the head up.  Like dermatomyositis, polymyositis is an autoimmune disease that can be associated with cancer and other autoimmune diseases, such as diabetes, thyroid disease and myasthenia gravis. It's more common in women than men, and tends to affect people aged between 30 and 60. How are these conditions treated? You may be referred to a physiotherapist, who can advise you on a manageable exercise programme to maintain muscle strength. Speech and language therapy may be needed if you have swallowing difficulties. Medication The main drug treatment for myositis is steroid medication, which can include: steroid creams for the affected areas of skin in dermatomyositis higher doses of steroid tablets if there is severe muscle weakness High doses of steroids can cause side effects such as weight gain, high blood pressure, diabetes, cataracts and osteoporosis. Learn more about the side effects of steroid medication. Doctors may prescribe an additional medication that suppresses the immune system, such as azathioprine, methotrexate or cyclophosphamide. These are slow to act, but in the long term may allow you to reduce the dose of steroids and therefore reduce the risk of their side effects. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy may be needed in very severe cases of myositis if you have severe muscle weakness causing life-threatening breathing or swallowing problems.  It involves having an injection of normal antibodies from donated blood. This temporarily changes the way your immune system operates. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy can produce a rapid improvement in the symptoms of myositis, but these drugs are very expensive and the benefits usually only last a few weeks. It is therefore not suitable as a long-term treatment, and is usually only used to treat people who are seriously ill while they are waiting for other treatments to become effective.  What is the outlook? Some people with either dermatomyositis or polymyositis respond well to medication. They may sometimes be able to stop using all steroids when their symptoms stop (while they're \"in remission\"), although most patients need to continue to take immunosuppressant medications long term. In time \u2013 usually years \u2013 it may be possible for some patients to stop all immunosuppressant medication if they remain well. Other patients respond less well to medication and find the disease affects their everyday activities and quality of life. More information For support and more information on dermatomyositis and polymyositis, visit the Myositis UK website and The Myositis Association (of America). Page last reviewed: 11\/12\/2014 Next review due: 11\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 36 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Cancer Myasthenia gravis Type 1 diabetes External links Arthritis Research UK: polymyositis and dermatomyositis The Myositis Association Myositis UK Dysphagia Dysphagia is a medical term for difficulty with swallowing. Find out about the different causes and treatments for this condition NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polyps, bowel","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polyps-bowel","content":"Bowel polyps - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Bowel polyps  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polyps, bowel Introduction  Bowel polyps are small growths on the inner lining of the colon (large bowel) or rectum. They are common, affecting 15-20% of the UK population, and don't usually cause symptoms. Polyps are usually less than 1cm in size, although they can grow up to several centimetres. There are various forms: some are a tiny raised area or bulge, known as a sessile polyp some look like a grape on a stalk, known as a pedunculated polyp some take the form of many tiny bumps clustered together Bowel polyps are not usually cancerous, although if they're discovered they'll need to be removed, as some will eventually turn into cancer if left untreated. Some people just develop one polyp, while others may have a few. They tend to occur in people over the age of 60. How are they caused? Bowel polyps are caused by an abnormal production of cells. The lining of the bowel constantly renews itself, and a faulty gene can cause the cells in the bowel lining to grow more quickly. There may be a family tendency towards developing bowel polyps or bowel cancer. What are the symptoms? Most people with polyps won't be aware of them as they produce no symptoms and are often discovered by accident. However, some larger polyps can cause: a small amount of rectal bleeding (blood in your stool) mucus to be produced when you open your bowels diarrhoea or constipation abdominal pain How are they discovered? Bowel polyps are usually found as a result of a bowel investigation for another reason, such as a sigmoidoscopy (examination of the last part of the bowel) or during screening for bowel cancer. If polyps are found, a colonoscopy or CT colonography is needed to view the whole of the large bowel and remove any polyps. How are they treated? There are several methods for treating polyps, but the most common procedure involves snaring the polyp during a colonoscopy. Snaring is like cutting the polyp off with cheese wire and is painless. Both of the above methods involve passing a flexible instrument called a colonoscope through your bottom and up into your bowel. The colonoscope has a wire with an electric current to either cauterise (burn off) or snare the polyp. In rare cases, polyps may need to be treated by surgically removing part of the bowel. This is usually only done when the polyp has some cell changes or is particularly large. After the polyp or polyps have been removed, they are sent to specialists in a laboratory, who will inform your consultant if: the polyp has been completely removed there is any risk of it regrowing there is any cancerous change in the polyp If there is a cancerous change in the polyp, you may need further treatment (depending on the degree and extent of change). Your specialist will be able to advise you on this. Outlook Some people will need further colonoscopies because polyps can recur. Polyps can sometimes run in families. This is uncommon, but means you'll need colonoscopy checks at regular intervals. You might be asked to have repeat examinations at intervals of around three to five years to catch any further polyps that may develop and potentially turn into bowel cancer. A polyp in the colon (large bowel)  Bowel cancer risk Polyps are not usually cancerous. But if some types of polyps are not removed, they may eventually become cancerous. This takes many years to happen, however. About 1 in 10 polyps will turn into cancer. These are called adenomas. Most doctors think all bowel cancers develop from polyps. Read more about bowel cancer  Page last reviewed: 13\/08\/2014 Next review due: 13\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1494 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 881  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 339  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bowel cancer Colonoscopy External links CORE: bowel polyps Bowel cancer symptom checker Use this symptom checker to find out if your symptoms require further investigation NHS cancer screening There are some types of cancers you can get free routine screening for NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polyps, nose","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polyps-nose","content":"Nasal polyps - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Nasal polyps  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polyps-nose Clinical trials Nasal polyps Polyps-nose Treatment Introduction  Nasal polyps are swellings of the normal nasal lining that occur inside the nasal passages and sinuses (air-filled spaces behind the nose, eyes and cheeks). They are typically pearly in colour and can vary in size. Each polyp is teardrop-shaped, and can look like a grape when fully grown. You may not always know if you have nasal polyps because they can be difficult to see and don't always cause any symptoms. What problems can they cause? Nasal polyps usually only cause problems if they are large or grow in clusters. Symptoms can include: a blocked nose, which can make it difficult to breathe through your nose a runny nose mucus that drips from the back of your nose down your throat (post-nasal drip) a reduced sense of smell or taste a feeling of fullness or pressure in the face snoring obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) \u2013  your airways become temporarily blocked while you're asleep, which can disturb your sleep If polyps block your sinuses, they can cause a build-up of fluid that may become infected (sinusitis). If this happens, you may have facial pain, toothache and a high temperature (fever). When to see your GP The symptoms of nasal polyps can be very similar to those of more common conditions, such as a cold. However, colds tend to clear up within a few days, whereas nasal polyps usually won't get better unless they're treated. You should see your GP if you have nasal symptoms that last a month or more. What causes nasal polyps? Nasal polyps are thought to develop as a result of inflammation of the lining of the nasal passages and sinuses. The lining becomes increasingly swollen and then hangs down. It's unclear exactly what triggers this inflammation, although certain things can increase your risk of developing nasal polyps, including: asthma \u2013 20-40% of people with nasal polyps also have asthma aspirin intolerance \u2013 allergy-like symptoms, such as a watery nose, occur if you take aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen Nasal polyps usually affect adults and are more common in men than women. They're rare in children. Diagnosing nasal polyps Your GP will ask you about your symptoms and examine the inside of your nose. Further tests carried out at the ear, nose and throat (ENT) department of your local hospital will often be needed to confirm polyps and to determine how large they are and how many you have. This will usually involve an endoscopy (where a small tube with a camera at one end is inserted up your nostril) or a computerised tomography (CT) scan. Treating nasal polyps Nasal polyps can be difficult to get rid of permanently, but steroid medication can often help shrink them, and surgery to remove them can be carried out if medication doesn't help. The main treatments are: corticosteroid nose drops or nasal sprays to shrink the polyps over a number of weeks or months corticosteroid tablets to shrink larger or more troublesome polyps quickly, although they're not usually used for more than 10 days because of the risk of side effects surgery to remove large or persistent polyps using tiny surgical instruments inserted up your nostrils As polyps can grow back after treatment, including after surgery, you will usually be advised to continue using corticosteroid nasal sprays to help stop them returning quickly. Read more about how nasal polyps are treated. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/02\/2015 Next review due: 12\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 553 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 313  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful The sinuses JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: Next review due: Useful links NHS Choices links Corticosteroids Cystic fibrosis Having surgery Sinusitis External links ENT UK: nasal polyps Cold or flu? Find out about symptoms of colds and flu and how to stop the viruses spreading Living with asthma Information on diagnosing, treating and living with asthma, as well as what to do during an asthma attack NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pompholyx","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pompholyx","content":"Pompholyx - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pompholyx (dyshidrotic eczema)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pompholyx Clinical trials Pompholyx Introduction  Pompholyx is a type of eczema that causes tiny blisters to develop across the fingers, palms of the hands and sometimes the soles of the feet. It's also known as dyshidrotic eczema. Pompholyx can affect people of any age, but it's most often seen in adults under 40 years of age. It can sometimes be confused with similar-looking conditions (see below). See your GP if you have any sort of blistering skin condition. Signs and symptoms of pompholyx Pompholyx usually starts as intense itching and burning of the skin on the hands and fingers. The palms and sides of the fingers (and sometimes the soles of the feet) then erupt into tiny itchy blisters that may weep fluid. In severe cases, the blisters may be quite large and may spread to the backs of the hands, feet and limbs. The skin can sometimes become infected. Signs of an infection can include the blisters becoming very painful and oozing pus or becoming covered in a golden crust. The blisters will usually heal within a few weeks. The skin tends to become dry and crack or peel as it starts to heal. What causes pompholyx? It's not clear exactly what causes pompholyx, but it may be triggered or made worse by: a fungal skin infection \u2013 this may be on the hands or at a distant site from the blisters (such as in between the toes) and will need treating a reaction to something that has touched your skin \u2013 such as certain metals (particularly nickel), detergents, household chemicals, soap, shampoo, cosmetic products or perfume stress sweating \u2013 pompholyx is more common in spring and summer, in warmer climates, and in people with hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) How long does it last? In many cases, pompholyx will clear up on its own within a few weeks. The treatments below may help relieve your symptoms in the meantime. Sometimes pompholyx may just occur once and never come back, but it often comes and goes over several months or years. Any of the triggers mentioned above can cause it to flare up again. Occasionally, pompholyx can be more continuous and difficult to treat. Treatments for pompholyx Protecting your skin You should try to avoid contact with anything that might irritate your skin, including soaps, shampoos and other household chemicals. Use an emollient as a soap substitute (see below) and wear cotton-lined gloves when you're at risk of contact with other potentially irritating substances, such as when washing your hair or doing housework. Don't burst the blisters \u2013 let them heal on their own. If they're particularly big, your GP may be able to drain them. Treating the symptoms The main treatments your GP may recommend to treat the symptoms of pompholyx are similar to those used when treating atopic eczema, including: emollients (moisturisers) \u2013 use these all the time and instead of soap to stop your skin becoming dry steroid cream \u2013 this reduces the inflammation and irritation and helps the skin to heal Your GP will probably prescribe a strong steroid cream to use for a short period of time, to minimise risk of steroid side effects. You may be advised to wear cotton gloves at night to help the cream sink into the skin. You can also try: soaking your hands in a dilute solution of potassium permanganate (1:10,000) for 10-15 minutes once or twice a day for up to five days antihistamines to relieve the itching and help you sleep if the itchiness is keeping you awake at night These treatments are available from pharmacies without a prescription. Your pharmacist can advise you whether they're suitable for you and how you should use them. Antibiotics may be prescribed if your skin becomes infected. Specialist treatments If your pompholyx keeps returning or is severe and doesn't get better with the above treatments, your GP may refer you to a specialist in treating skin conditions (dermatologist). A dermatologist may recommend one of the following treatments: phototherapy \u2013 controlled exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light steroid tablets or very strong steroid cream immunosuppressant creams or ointments, such as pimecrolimus or tacrolimus immunosuppressant tablets or capsules, such as ciclosporin or azathioprine alitretinoin capsules \u2013 medication that helps improve severe eczema affecting the hands when other treatments haven't worked Similar skin conditions Conditions that can have a similar appearance to pompholyx include: bullous impetigo \u2013 a contagious skin infection that mainly affects children and causes sores and blisters bullous pemphigoid \u2013 a blistering skin condition that tends to affect the elderly  contact dermatitis \u2013 a type of eczema caused by skin contact with a substance that causes irritation or an allergic reaction  hand, foot and mouth disease \u2013 a viral infection that mainly affects young children, which can cause small blisters to develop on the fingers and palms of the hands herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) \u2013 an abscess (collection of pus) at the end of the finger that can cause it to become suddenly red, swollen, painful and blistered pustular psoriasis \u2013 an uncommon type of psoriasis that causes pus-filled blisters to appear on your skin Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/07\/2015 Next review due: 06\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 146 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Atopic eczema Contact dermatitis Emollients Steroid cream External links National Eczema Society: pompholyx Dermnet NZ: pictures of pompholyx Skin conditions: a visual guide Identify common skin conditions and problems, including psoriasis, eczema, acne, ringworm, athlete's foot and rashes Atopic eczema Atopic eczema is a condition where the skin becomes itchy, red, dry and cracked. Find out about why it happens and how it's treated NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Port wine stain","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Birthmarks","content":"Birthmarks - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Birthmarks  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Birthmarks Birthmarks Treatment Birthmarks Complications   Birthmarks are coloured marks that are visible on the skin. They're often present at birth or develop soon afterwards. There are several different types of birthmark and some of them are very common. The two main types of birthmark are: vascular birthmarks (often red, purple or pink) caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin pigmented birthmarks (usually brown) caused by clusters of pigment cells Vascular birthmarks often occur in the head and neck area, mainly on the face. But both types of birthmark can appear anywhere, including inside the body. If surface blood vessels are affected, a vascular birthmark will appear red, purple or pink. If the affected vessels are deep, the birthmark will appear blue. Pigmented birthmarks are tan or brown-coloured skin marks. Vascular birthmarks Some of the most common types of vascular birthmarks are described below. Salmon patch (stork mark) Salmon patches are flat red or pink patches that can appear on a baby's eyelids, neck or forehead at birth. They're the most common type of vascular birthmark and occur in around half of all babies. Most salmon patches will fade completely within a few months, but if they occur on the forehead they may take up to four years to disappear. Patches on the back of the neck can last longer. Salmon patches are often more noticeable when a baby cries because they fill with blood and become darker. Infantile haemangioma Infantile haemangiomas, also known as strawberry marks, are raised marks on the skin that are usually red. They can appear anywhere on the body. Sometimes infantile haemangiomas occur deeper in the skin, in which case the skin can look blue or purple. Haemangiomas are common, particularly in girls, and affect around 5% of babies soon after birth. They rapidly increase in size for the first six months before eventually shrinking and disappearing by around seven years of age. Haemangiomas that get bigger rapidly, or those that interfere with vision or feeding, may need to be treated. Capillary malformation (port wine stain) Capillary malformation, also known as port wine stains, are flat red or purple marks that affect a very small number of newborn babies. They can vary in size, from a few millimetres to several centimetres in diameter. Port wine stains often affect one side of the body and usually occur on the face, chest and back (although they can occur anywhere). They tend to be sensitive to hormones and may become more noticeable around puberty, pregnancy and the menopause. Most are permanent and may deepen in colour over time. Pigmented birthmarks Some of the most common types of pigmented birthmarks are described below. Café-au-lait spots Café-au-lait spots are coffee-coloured skin patches. Many children have one or two, but if more than six have developed by the time the child is five, you should see your GP. It could be a sign of neurofibromatosis (a number of genetic conditions that cause tumours to grow along the nerves). Mongolian spots Mongolian spots are blue-grey or bruised-looking birthmarks that are present from birth. They're more commonly seen in darker-skinned people and usually occur over the lower back or buttocks. However, they can also appear elsewhere on the body or limbs. Mongolian spots may last for months or years, but they usually disappear by the time a child reaches four years of age. They're completely harmless and don't need treatment. They may sometimes be mistaken for a bruise. Congenital melanocytic naevi Congenital melanocytic naevi are also known as congenital moles. They're relatively large brown or black moles that are present from birth. They're fairly common and are caused by an overgrowth of pigment cells in the skin. Most congenital melanocytic naevi become proportionally smaller and less obvious with time, although they may darken during puberty or become bumpy or hairy. They can range in size from less than 1.5cm (about 0.6 inches) to more than 20cm (about 7.9 inches) in diameter. The risk of a naevi developing into skin cancer is low, but the risk increases the larger it is. What causes birthmarks? It's not fully understood why birthmarks occur, but they're not usually inherited. Vascular birthmarks are caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin, and pigmented birthmarks are caused by clusters of pigment cells. Port wine stains are thought to occur because the nerves that control the widening or narrowing of the capillaries (tiny blood vessels) don't function properly, or there aren't enough of them. This means that blood is constantly supplied to the skin in that area, which makes it permanently red or purple in colour. Port wine stains are sometimes related to other conditions, such as Sturge-Weber syndrome and Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome. Read more about the complications associated with birthmarks. Treating birthmarks Most birthmarks are harmless and don't need to be treated. Some types of birthmarks will fade over time, whereas other types such as port wine stains will be permanent if they're not treated. In some cases, a birthmark will need to be treated for medical reasons \u2013 for example, if a haemangioma blocks the airways, affects vision or becomes ulcerated. Some people may also decide to seek treatment for cosmetic reasons. Read more about treating birthmarks. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/06\/2016 Next review due: 14\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 144 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 82  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Birthmarks (haemangioma) Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Haemangiomas are vascular birthmarks caused by abnormal blood vessels in or under the skin. Find out how to deal with birthmarks and what to do if they cause complications, such as problems with eyesight or breathing. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Cosmetic surgery Facial disfigurement Moles Plastic surgery Scars External links Birthmark Support Group British Association of Skin Camouflage Cavernoma Alliance UK Changing Faces: skin camouflage Great Ormond Street: skin laser treatment Skin Camouflage Network Treating birthmarks Advice on getting treatment for birthmarks, such as port wine stains and haemangiomas Find and choose services for Birthmarks Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Positron emission tomography","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/PET-scan","content":"PET scan - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories PET scan  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview PET-scan Clinical trials PET scan Introduction  Positron emission tomography (PET) scans are used to produce detailed three-dimensional images of the inside of the body. The images can clearly show the part of the body being investigated, including any abnormal areas, and can highlight how well certain functions of the body are working. PET scans are often combined with computerised tomography (CT) scans to produce even more detailed images. This is known as a PET-CT scan. They may also occasionally be combined with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. This is known as a PET-MRI scan. Why PET scans are used An advantage of a PET scan is that it can show how well certain parts of your body are working, rather that showing what it looks like. They're particularly helpful for investigating confirmed cases of cancer, to determine how far the cancer has spread and how well it's responding to treatment. Sometimes PET scans are used to help plan operations, such as a coronary artery bypass graft or brain surgery for epilepsy. They can also help diagnose some conditions that affect the normal workings of the brain, such as dementia. How PET scans work PET scanners work by detecting the radiation given off by a substance called a radiotracer as it collects in different parts of your body. In most PET scans a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is used, which is similar to naturally occurring glucose (a type of sugar) so your body treats it in a similar way. By analysing the areas where the radiotracer does and doesn't build up, it's possible to work out how well certain body functions are working and identify any abnormalities. For example, a concentration of FDG in the body's tissues can help identify cancerous cells because cancer cells use glucose at a much faster rate than normal cells. What happens during a PET scan PET scans are usually carried out on an outpatient basis. This means you won't need to stay in hospital overnight. It's important to arrive on time for your scan, as the radiotracer used has a short shelf-life and your scan may be cancelled if you're late. Preparation Your appointment letter will mention anything you need to do to prepare for your scan. You will usually be advised not to eat anything for six hours beforehand. Drinking is allowed, but you should ideally just drink water. You should also avoid strenuous exercise for 24 hours before your appointment. It's a good idea to wear loose comfortable clothes, as you may be able to wear these during the scan (although sometimes you may be asked to change into a hospital gown). Try to avoid wearing jewellery and clothes containing metal (such as zips), as these will need to be removed. Radiotracer injection Before the scan, the radiotracer is injected into a vein in your arm or hand. You will need to wait quietly for about an hour, to give it time to be absorbed by the cells in your body. It's important to relax, keep as still as possible, and avoid talking while you wait, as moving and speaking can affect where the radiotracer goes in your body. You can go to the toilet if you need to at any point. The scan For the scan, you lie on a flat bed that will be moved into the centre of the large, circular scanner. You should stay still and not talk while the scanner takes pictures of your body, which usually takes up to 30 minutes. The scan is completely painless, but you may feel uncomfortable lying still for this long. If you feel unwell at any point there is a buzzer you can press to alert the medical team. The medical team will be able to see you throughout the scan. For some people, being inside the scanner can be an unpleasant experience. Inform the hospital before the day of the scan if you think this may be a problem for you. They may be able to arrange for you to have a sedative to help you relax during the scan. Afterwards You should not experience any side effects after a PET scan and should usually be able to go home soon afterwards. The results of your scan will not usually be available on the same day. They will be sent to your specialist to be discussed at your next appointment. Are there any risks? Any exposure to radiation carries a very small risk of potential tissue damage that could lead to cancer at a later date. However, in a standard PET scan the amount of radiation you're exposed to is small \u2013 about the same as the amount you get from natural sources, such as the sun, over three years. The radiotracer becomes quickly less radioactive over time and will usually be passed out of your body naturally within a few hours. Drinking plenty of fluid after the scan can help flush it from your body. As a precaution, you may be advised to avoid prolonged close contact with pregnant women, babies or young children for a few hours after a PET scan, as you will be slightly radioactive during this time. The CT component of a PET-CT scan also involves exposure to a small amount of additional radiation, but the risk of this causing any problems in the future is still very small. Page last reviewed: 11\/02\/2015 Next review due: 11\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 670 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 378  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 155  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 93  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer CT scan MRI scan Radiation External links Cancer Research UK: PET scan Outpatients and day patients Find out what happens on the day of your hospital outpatient appointment CT scan Find out why CT scans are used and read about what happens before, during and after the scan NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Possetting","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/reflux-babies","content":"Reflux in babies - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Reflux in babies  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Reflux in babies Introduction  Babies often bring up milk during or shortly after feeding \u2013 this is known as 'possetting', or 'reflux'. This is different to vomiting, where the baby's muscles forcefully contract (vomiting in babies is covered separately). Reflux is just your baby passively \"spitting up\" whatever they have just swallowed. However, it can still be upsetting to parents, and it's natural to be worried that something is wrong. It's important know that reflux is normal, and often just the result of a baby's underdeveloped oesophagus (food canal). It usually stops when the baby reaches 12-14 months of age, when the ring of muscle at the bottom of their oesophagus fully develops and closes off, preventing stomach contents from leaking out. It's unusual if reflux continues at 18 months. Only in a small number of cases can reflux be a sign of a more serious problem, such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), a milk allergy or a blockage. This page covers: What tips can I try to help my baby's reflux? When should I see my GP? What might the problem be, in this case? How are these conditions investigated? What treatments can my doctor offer me? What tips can I try to help my baby's reflux? It should generally help to: burp your baby regularly throughout feeding avoid overfeeding your baby \u2013 don\u2019t force them to take more milk than they want (some babies prefer to feed little and often) check that the hole in your baby's teat is not too big \u2013 giving milk too quickly can cause regurgitation hold your baby upright for a period of time after feeding Bear in mind that if your baby brings up a lot of milk, they may be hungry again quite quickly. For more general advice on feeding your baby, you can read our bottle feeding advice and help for breastfeeding problems. It can also help to raise the head end of your child's cot or crib when they are sleeping \u2013 try using books under the legs of the cot or crib, or placing a pillow underneath the mattress at the head end (never put any pillows inside the cot). Your baby should still be laid down to sleep on their back. When should I see my GP? If reflux happens often, or your baby is violently sick, appears to be in pain or you're worried for any other reason, talk to your health visitor or GP \u2013 especially if they have any of the following symptoms: coughing, gagging or trouble swallowing frequent projectile vomiting persistent crying and being irritable wheezing bad breath difficulty sleeping arching their back during or after a feed drawing their legs up to their tummy after feeding refusing a feed even though they're happy to suck on a dummy or similar not gaining much weight, or losing weight What might the problem be, in this case? GORD Babies who repeatedly bring up their food after feeding may have GORD, which is a more serious, long-term form of reflux.  Normally, a ring of muscle at the bottom of the oesophagus acts like a valve, opening to let food fall into the stomach, then closing to prevent acid leaking out of the stomach. In GORD, this muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't, and doesn't close properly. This allows the acidic stomach contents to rise up and irritate the lining of the oesophagus. GORD is more common in babies who: were born prematurely had a very low birthweight are allergic to cows' milk have a muscle or nerve disorder, such as cerebral palsy As your baby grows older, the muscle should open only when he or she swallows, and remain tightly closed at all other times to prevent stomach contents escaping. This is why most babies grow out of reflux by 18 months. An allergy  If you think your baby is having a reaction to infant formula or cows' milk, tell your GP. Some of the signs are a skin rash, vomiting and diarrhoea. Your GP can prescribe special formula feeds called \"extensively hydrolysed protein feeds\" (see When should I see my GP?). If your baby is allergic to cows' milk, eliminating it from their diet for two to three weeks should reduce their vomiting considerably. If you breastfeed, you'll need to exclude cows' milk from your own diet. Some infant formula is labelled as hypoallergenic, but this is not suitable for babies with a diagnosed cows' milk allergy. Always talk to your GP before using hypoallergenic or soya-based infant formula, as babies who are allergic to cows' milk may also be allergic to soya. If your baby continues to vomit despite cutting out cows' milk, it's unlikely that an allergy is the problem. A blockage It's rare, but possible, that your baby's reflux may be caused by a blockage in their digestive tract. Their oesophagus may be blocked or narrowed (known as an \"oesophageal stricture\"), or there may be a blockage between your baby's stomach and small intestine (known as \"pyloric stenosis\"). The following websites have more information on these rare conditions: TOFS (charity): oesophageal stricture Great Ormond Street Hospital: pyloric stenosis How are these conditions investigated? If your baby has severe symptoms, your GP may refer you to a paediatrician for further investigation (a paediatrician is a specialist in treating disorders in children). Your baby may have one or more of the following tests. An upper endoscopy An endoscopy is a procedure where the inside of the body is examined using an endoscope \u2013 a long, thin, flexible tube that has a light source and a video camera at one end. Your baby may need an upper endoscopy (examination of their oesophagus and stomach) if they continue to have problems, despite feeding changes and medication. The endoscope will be carefully fed through your baby's mouth and down their oesophagus after they've been sedated and given extra oxygen. An instrument on the end of the endoscope can be used to take a biopsy (tissue sample) of the oesophagus. This will be sent to a laboratory and examined to see if there's any inflammation. Read more about an endoscopy. Impedance-pH monitoring of the oesophagus Impedance-pH monitoring measures the amount of liquid and acid in your baby's oesophagus. It is carried out in hospital, by a paediatrician, as part of an upper endoscopy. A thin tube will be passed through your baby's nose or mouth to their stomach while they are awake. It is taped to your baby's cheek, where it remains for 24 hours.  The end of the tube has sensors to detect when and how much acid or liquid travels up into your baby's oesophagus. The other end is attached to a monitor outside your baby's body, which shows the measurements taken. Barium swallow test A barium swallow test, sometimes called an \"upper GI series\", can identify blockages or problems with the muscles used during swallowing. It's used to rule out an abnormality with your baby's oesophagus. Your baby will rest in front of an X-ray machine and drink a barium solution from a bottle. An X-ray will be taken, and the barium will coat the inside of your baby's digestive tract, showing its shape. What treatments can my doctor offer me? GORD Treatment for babies and toddlers with mild symptoms of GORD isn't always needed, because they often grow out of the condition after a few months. In the past, health professionals would recommend adding a thickener (such as cereal) to breast milk or formula feed to make it stickier and heavier \u2013 which, in theory, would make it more likely to stay in the baby's stomach. However, there's no scientific evidence to support this, so thickeners don't tend to be recommended nowadays. If you wish to try this, seek your GP's advice first. Your GP may recommend an anti-regurgitation formula, or an antacid combined with another medicine called an alginate. Alginates form a foam barrier that floats on the surface of the stomach's contents, and should help the milk stay in your baby's stomach. Reaction to cows' milk If your baby is diagnosed with a cows' milk allergy, your GP can prescribe a different type of infant formula known as extensively or fully hydrolysed formula. This means that: the milk proteins are broken down into smaller parts, making them easier to digest it's much less likely that the cows' milk protein will cause an allergy Many children outgrow their milk allergies. Medication  Medicines are rarely needed for reflux in babies, and their benefits are uncertain. However, if your baby's feeding problems are unexplained, or your baby is not gaining much weight or is distressed, you may be referred to a paediatrician, who may suggest a trial of medication \u2013 either ranitidine or omeprazole \u2013 to reduce the amount of acid their stomach produces.  For more information, read about ranitidine for children and omeprazole for children (links to external site). Why else could my baby be crying? Reflux can make your baby irritable and upset \u2013 but consider whether your baby may be crying for another reason, such as: hunger a dirty or wet nappy tiredness wanting a cuddle wind being too hot or too cold boredom overstimulation Learn more about crying in babies, including getting help for excessive crying. Page last reviewed: 16\/10\/2014 Next review due: 16\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 53 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Lifestyle and breastfeeding Infant formula: common questions Food allergies in children External links Cry-sis Living with Reflux Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Breastfeeding a premature baby Why breast milk is important for your premature baby, how to express breast milk, and tips on breastfeeding directly from the breast NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postherpetic neuralgia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postherpetic-neuralgia","content":"Post-herpetic neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Post-herpetic neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postherpetic-neuralgia Clinical trials Post-herpetic neuralgia postherpetic-neuralgia Treatment Introduction  Post-herpetic neuralgia is a persistent nerve pain that occurs at the site of a previous attack of shingles. It's estimated that up to one in every five people with shingles will go on to develop post-herpetic neuralgia, and older people are particularly at risk. The pain can improve after a few months and medication can help control it in the meantime, although some cases are more persistent and can even be permanent. Why does it happen? In post-herpetic neuralgia, the varicella zoster virus (the virus that causes chickenpox and shingles) damages nerves under the skin of the affected area. It is not clear why some people with shingles develop post-herpetic neuralgia, but increasing age, pain in the early (prodromal) stage of a shingles attack and severe pain throughout an episode of shingles are all associated with an increased risk of the condition. Signs and symptoms The main symptom of post-herpetic neuralgia is continuous nerve pain in an area previously affected by shingles. The pain has been described as burning, stabbing, shooting, aching or throbbing. The affected area may also: feel intensely itchy be more sensitive to pain than usual (hyperalgesia) feel painful as a result of something that would not normally hurt (allodynia), such as a light touch or a cool breeze Living with post-herpetic neuralgia can be very difficult, as it can interfere with your ability to carry out certain daily activities, such as dressing and bathing, and can lead to further problems such as extreme tiredness (fatigue), sleeping difficulties and depression. Read about living with long-term pain for information and tips on how to cope. Seeing your GP It is important to revisit your GP if you experience persistent pain after having shingles to discuss the medications available to help control it. Post-herpetic neuralgia is easy to diagnose based on your symptoms and medical history because it only occurs as a complication of shingles, and the pain will be in the area of the body that was affected by the condition. How post-herpetic neuralgia is treated Many people with post-herpetic neuralgia make a full recovery within a year of developing the condition. But occasionally the nerves do not heal completely and symptoms last for several years or permanently. Medication can ease the symptoms of post-herpetic neuralgia, although they may not relieve the pain completely. As post-herpetic neuralgia generally doesn't respond to standard painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, alternative medications will need to be prescribed. These will often be medications originally intended to treat depression (antidepressants) or epilepsy (anticonvulsants), but have since been found to also be effective in relieving nerve pain. Read more about treating post-herpetic neuralgia. Can post-herpetic neuralgia be prevented? There is no definite way to prevent post-herpetic neuralgia. However, antiviral medication will often be given early during an episode of shingles to help reduce the risk of complications such as post-herpetic neuralgia. Alternatively, you can reduce your risk of post-herpetic neuralgia by having the shingles vaccination to try to prevent an attack of shingles occurring. This vaccine is routinely offered to older people on the NHS. It is given as a single injection to anyone aged 70. There is also a catch-up programme for those aged 78 and 79. You will only need to have this vaccine once. If you wish to have the shingles vaccine and you are not eligible for the NHS vaccination programme, you will usually need to visit a private clinic. Private vaccination is likely to cost £100 to £200. Trigeminal neuralgia This article focuses on post-herpetic neuralgia, a common type of nerve pain that occurs after a previous attack of shingles. Despite having a similar name, trigeminal neuralgia is a much rarer type of facial nerve pain that occurs in sudden short attacks lasting from a few seconds to about two minutes. Read more about trigeminal neuralgia. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 12\/08\/2014 Next review due: 12\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 320 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 151  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 77  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antidepressants Chickenpox Living with pain Shingles Trigeminal neuralgia External links The British Pain Society Pain Concern Shingles Find out about shingles, a painful condition caused by the chickenpox virus Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postmenopausal bleeding","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postmenopausal-bleeding-or-spotting","content":"Postmenopausal bleeding - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postmenopausal bleeding  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postmenopausal-bleeding-or-spotting Clinical trials Postmenopausal bleeding Introduction  Postmenopausal bleeding is vaginal bleeding that happens at least 12 months after your periods have stopped. Although it's a common problem, it's not normal to bleed at this time \u2013 even if it's just spotting \u2013 so don't ignore it. Make an appointment to see your GP as soon as possible. The cause is usually something minor, such as inflammation of the womb lining, but cancer is always a possibility that must be ruled out. Most likely causes There can be several reasons for bleeding after the menopause. The most common causes are: inflammation and thinning of the vaginal lining (atrophic vaginitis) or womb lining (endometrial atrophy) \u2013 caused by lower oestrogen levels cervical or womb polyps \u2013 growths, which are usually non-cancerous, that can form in the cervix (neck of the womb) or the womb itself a thickened womb lining (endometrial hyperplasia) \u2013 which can be caused by hormone replacement therapy (HRT), high levels of oestrogen or by being overweight; if left untreated this can lead to development of womb cancer (also known as endometrial cancer) About 1 in every 10 women with postmenopausal bleeding will have womb cancer, and in a few cases bleeding may be a sign of another type of cancer such as vulval, vaginal or cervical cancer. Diagnosing the cause Your GP should refer you to hospital for further tests. This will help to identify the cause of your problem, to exclude cancer and plan necessary treatment. Some areas have specialist postmenopausal bleeding clinics.  The tests that may be carried out can include: a vaginal ultrasound scan a pelvic examination tests on a sample of your womb lining (endometrial biopsy) a camera test called a hysteroscopy These procedures are described below. Some GPs are able to carry out the ultrasound and examination themselves, and will refer you for the hysteroscopy if this is necessary. At the clinic The specialist at the clinic, which may be a nurse, will take your medical history and record your symptoms. You'll then go to the scan room for an examination. Vaginal ultrasound scan A vaginal ultrasound scan is performed by gently inserting a fine ultrasound probe into your vagina, which you may find slightly uncomfortable. It usually takes about 10 minutes. The probe emits high-frequency sound waves to create an image of the inside of your vagina and womb, which is then displayed on a monitor. The results of this examination will then be discussed with you, and you'll find out whether you need a biopsy or hysteroscopy. This is mainly determined by the thickness of the womb lining. Pelvic examination The specialist will also carry out a pelvic examination. They will insert a speculum into your vagina, similar to having a cervical screening test, so your vulva, vagina and cervix can be carefully examined. Most women find this a bit uncomfortable. Swabs may be taken from your vagina and\/or cervix to rule out any infection. The doctor may wish to carry out a cervical screening test as well if this is overdue. If the lining of the womb is thickened, a small sample of tissue (biopsy) may be removed using a fine, flexible plastic tube. This can cause cramps and bleeding, which usually settles very quickly. The test can be stopped if you are finding it too uncomfortable, so let the healthcare professional carrying out the test know if you want them to stop. The speculum is then removed and an internal examination is performed. This allows the doctor to gauge the size, shape and consistency of your womb, and also assess if there is any tenderness in your pelvis. Hysteroscopy A hysteroscopy allows the doctor to look inside your womb and remove a small sample of tissue for testing using a fine telescope-like instrument called a hysteroscope. The hysteroscope is passed through your cervix under either local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed so you don't feel any pain) or general anaesthetic (where you are asleep). Read more about having a hysteroscopy. Treating postmenopausal bleeding Treatment depends on what is causing your bleeding. For example, if the cause is cervical polyps, you may need to have them removed. This fairly simple procedure can be done in the specialist's office. Small forceps are used to grasp and gently twist the polyp, which usually comes off easily, and any bleeding is stopped using cautery (heat) or by applying chemicals. Endometrial atrophy can be treated with oestrogen cream or pessaries, although treatment may not be necessary if your symptoms are minimal. There are various types of endometrial hyperplasia which may be treated with hormone medication (tablets or an intrauterine system implant) or surgery to remove your uterus, cervix and ovaries (a total hysterectomy). Occasionally, if the changes are mild, no treatment may be necessary. If your bleeding is thought to be a side effect of HRT, altering or stopping the treatment may be recommended. If you have womb cancer, a total hysterectomy will often be recommended.  Read more about treating womb cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 15\/08\/2014 Next review due: 15\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 513 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 255  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 155  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Menopause Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysteroscopy Absent periods Womb cancer External links British Menopause Society Menopause Matters What to expect from the menopause Hot flushes and night sweats are among the common symptoms of menopause 'I started bleeding after the menopause' Gabrielle describes how early diagnosis of womb (endometrial) cancer saved her life HRT and the menopause Find out the facts about the menopause and hormone replacement therapy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Post-mortem","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Post-mortem","content":"Post-mortem - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Post-mortem  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Post-mortem Clinical trials Post-mortem Introduction  A post-mortem examination, also known as an autopsy, is the examination of a body after death. The aim of a post-mortem is to determine the cause of death. Post-mortems are carried out by pathologists (doctors who specialise in understanding the nature and causes of disease). The Royal College of Pathologists and the Human Tissue Authority (HTA) set the standards pathologists work to. Post-mortems provide useful information about how, when and why someone died, and they enable pathologists to obtain a better understanding of how diseases spread. Learning more about illnesses and medical conditions benefits patients too, because it means they'll receive more effective treatment in the future. If your child, partner or relative has died and a post-mortem is to be carried out, hospital bereavement officers can offer you support and advice. They also act as the main point of contact between you and the staff carrying out the post-mortem. When post-mortems are carried out A post-mortem examination will be carried out if it's been requested by: a coroner \u2013 because the cause of death is unknown, or following a sudden, violent or unexpected death a hospital doctor \u2013 to find out more about an illness or the cause of death, or to further medical research and understanding The two different types of post-mortem are discussed below. Coroner\u2019s post-mortem examination A coroner is a judicial officer responsible for investigating deaths in certain situations (see below). Coroners are usually lawyers or doctors with a minimum of five years' experience. In most cases, a doctor or the police refer a death to the coroner. A death will be referred to the coroner if: it's unexpected, such as the sudden death of a baby (cot death) it's violent, unnatural or suspicious, such as a suicide or drug overdose it's the result of an accident or injury it occurred during or soon after a hospital procedure, such as surgery the cause of death is unknown The main aim of a post-mortem requested by a coroner is to find out how someone died and decide whether an inquest is needed. An inquest is a legal investigation into the circumstances surrounding a person's death. If someone related to you has died and their death has been referred to a coroner, you won't be asked to give consent (permission) for a post-mortem to take place. This is because the coroner is required by law to carry out a post-mortem when a death is suspicious, sudden or unnatural. A coroner may decide to hold an inquest after a post-mortem has been completed. Samples of organs and tissues may need to be retained until after the inquest has finished. If the death occurred in suspicious circumstances, samples may also need to be kept by the police, as evidence, for a longer period. In some cases, samples may need to be kept for a number of months or even years. The coroner's office will discuss the situation with you if, following an inquest, tissue samples need to be retained for a certain length of time. Hospital post-mortem examination Post-mortems are sometimes requested by hospital doctors to provide more information about an illness or the cause of death, or to further medical research. Sometimes, the partner or relative of the deceased person will request a hospital post-mortem to find out more about the cause of death. Hospital post-mortems can only be carried out with consent. Sometimes, a person may have given their consent before they died. If this isn't the case, a person who is close to the deceased can give their consent for a post-mortem to take place. Hospital post-mortems may be limited to particular areas of the body, such as the head, chest or abdomen. When you're asked to give your consent, this will be discussed with you. During the post-mortem, only the organs or tissue that you've agreed to can be removed for examination. The HTA recommends that you should be given at least 24 hours to consider your decision about the post-mortem examination. You should also be given the details of someone to contact in case you change your mind. What happens during a post-mortem A post-mortem will be carried out as soon as possible, usually within two to three working days of a person's death. In some cases, it may be possible for it to take place within 24 hours. Depending upon when the examination is due to take place, you may be able to see the body before the post-mortem is carried out. The post-mortem takes place in an examination room that looks similar to an operating theatre. The examination room will be licensed and inspected by the HTA. During the procedure, the deceased person's body is opened and the organs removed for examination. A diagnosis can sometimes be made by looking at the organs. Some organs need to be examined in close detail during a post-mortem and these investigations can take several weeks to complete. The pathologist will return the organs to the body after the post-mortem has been completed. If you wish, you'll usually be able to view the body after the examination. Once release papers have been issued, the undertakers you've appointed will be able to collect the body from the mortuary in preparation for the funeral. What happens after a post-mortem After a post-mortem, the pathologist writes a report of the findings. If the post-mortem was requested by the coroner, the coroner or coroner's officer will let you know the cause of death determined by the pathologist. If you want a full copy of the pathologist's report, you can request this from the coroner's office, but there may be a fee. In some cases, the report may be sent to a hospital doctor or GP so they can discuss it with you. If the post-mortem was requested by a hospital doctor, you'll have to request the results from the hospital where the post-mortem took place. You may be charged a small fee for this. You can arrange to discuss the results with the doctor in charge of the deceased person's care while they were in hospital (if applicable), or with your GP. The HTA has produced a leaflet providing further information about what happens before, during and after the examination \u2013 Post-mortem examination: Your choices about organs and tissue (PDF, 68kb). The Human Tissue Authority The Human Tissue Authority (HTA) ensures that human tissue is used safely, ethically and with proper consent. It regulates organisations that remove, store and use tissue for research, medical treatment, post-mortem examination, teaching and public display. All premises where post-mortems are carried out must be licensed by the HTA. Bereavement support For many people, understanding the reason for a loved one's death helps them come to terms with their loss. Talking and sharing your feelings with someone can also help. Some people find that relying on the support of family and friends is the best way to cope. Your GP will be able to put you in touch with bereavement services in your area. You can also contact the national Cruse helpline on 0844 477 9400 or a local Cruse centre. Read more about bereavement and coming to terms with the death of a loved one. Page last reviewed: 25\/11\/2015 Next review due: 25\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 404 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 280  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Bereavement Human Tissue Authority Inquest Organ donation External links Bereavement Advice Centre Child Bereavement UK Cruse Bereavement Care GOV.UK: What to do after someone dies HTA: post mortem examinations Sands: Baby post-mortems Donation: ethics and worries There are many issues and concerns surrounding organ donation. Get the answers to some common questions Registering a death Taking you through the practicalities of registering that someone has died What is pathology? It's not all about dead bodies. Find out what role pathology plays in providing healthcare NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postnatal depression","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Postnataldepression","content":"Postnatal depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postnatal depression  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Postnataldepression Real stories Postnataldepression Clinical trials Postnataldepression Community Postnatal depression Postnataldepression Symptoms Postnataldepression Treatment Introduction  Postnatal depression is a type of depression that many parents experience after having a baby. It's a common problem, affecting more than 1 in every 10 women within a year of giving birth. It can also affect fathers and partners, although this is less common. It's important to seek help as soon as possible if you think you might be depressed, as your symptoms could last months or get worse and have a significant impact on you, your baby and your family. With the right support, which can include self-help strategies and therapy, most women make a full recovery. Symptoms of postnatal depression Many women feel a bit down, tearful or anxious in the first week after giving birth. This is often called the \"baby blues\" and is so common that it\u2019s considered normal. The \"baby blues\" don\u2019t last for more than two weeks after giving birth.  If your symptoms last longer or start later, you could have postnatal depression. Postnatal depression can start any time in the first year after giving birth. Signs that you or someone you know might be depressed include: a persistent feeling of sadness and low mood lack of enjoyment and loss of interest in the wider world lack of energy and feeling tired all the time trouble sleeping at night and feeling sleepy during the day difficulty bonding with your baby withdrawing from contact with other people problems concentrating and making decisions frightening thoughts \u2013 for example, about hurting your baby Many women don't realise they have postnatal depression, because it can develop gradually. Read more about the symptoms of postnatal depression. Getting help for postnatal depression Speak to your GP or health visitor if you think you may be depressed. Many health visitors have been trained to recognise postnatal depression and have techniques that can help. If they can't help, they'll know someone in your area who can. Encourage your partner to seek help if you think they might be having problems. Don't struggle alone hoping that the problem will go away. Remember that: a range of help and support is available, including therapy depression is an illness like any other  it's not your fault you're depressed \u2013 it can happen to anyone being depressed doesn't mean you're a bad parent it doesn\u2019t mean you\u2019re going mad your baby won't be taken away from you \u2013 babies are only taken into care in very exceptional circumstances Treatments for postnatal depression Postnatal depression can be lonely, distressing and frightening, but support and effective treatments are available. These include: self-help \u2013 things you can try yourself include: talking to your family and friends about your feelings and what they can do to help; making time for yourself to do things you enjoy; resting whenever you get the chance and getting as much sleep as you can at night; exercising regularly; eating a healthy diet psychological therapy \u2013 your GP may be able to recommend a self-help course, or may refer you for a course of therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) antidepressants \u2013 these may be recommended if your depression is more severe or other treatments haven't helped; your doctor can prescribe a medicine that's safe to take while breastfeeding Local and national organisations, such as the Association for Post Natal Illness (APNI) and Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support (PANDAS), can also be useful sources of help and advice. Read more about treating postnatal depression. What causes postnatal depression? The cause of postnatal depression isn't completely clear. Some of the factors it has been associated with include: a history of mental health problems, particularly depression, earlier in life a history of mental health problems during pregnancy having no close family or friends to support you a poor relationship with your partner recent stressful life events, such as a bereavement experiencing the \"baby blues\" Even if you don't have any of these symptoms, having a baby is a life-changing event that can sometimes trigger depression. It often takes time to adapt to becoming a new parent. Looking after a small baby can be stressful and exhausting. Can postnatal depression be prevented? Although there have been several studies into preventing postnatal depression, there is no evidence that there\u2019s anything specific you can do to prevent the condition developing, apart from maintaining as healthy a lifestyle as you can for yourself. However, if you have a history of depression or mental health problems, or if you have a family history of mental health problems after childbirth, tell your GP or mental health team if you\u2019re pregnant or thinking of having a baby. This is so they can offer you appropriate monitoring and treatment, if necessary. If you have had a mental health problem while pregnant, your doctor should arrange for you to be seen regularly in the first few weeks after birth. Myths about postnatal depression Postnatal depression is often misunderstood and there are many myths surrounding it. These include: Postnatal depression is less severe than other types of depression. In fact, it's as serious as other types of depression. Postnatal depression is entirely caused by hormonal changes. It's actually caused by many different factors. Postnatal depression will soon pass. Unlike the \"baby blues\", postnatal depression can persist for months if left untreated. In a minority of cases, it can become a long-term problem. Postnatal depression only affects women. Research has actually found that up to 1 in 25 new fathers become depressed after having a baby. Page last reviewed: 11\/02\/2016 Next review due: 11\/02\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 276 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Postnatal depression Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Mums who have had postnatal depression talk about the feelings they faced, and perinatal psychiatrist Dr Margaret Oates explains how it can be treated quickly with the right help. Media last reviewed: 18\/06\/2015 Next review due: 18\/06\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Antidepressants Clinical depression Cognitive behavioural therapy Feeling depressed after childbirth Find postnatal depression information and support External links Action on Postpartum Psychosis Association for Post Natal Illness Birth Trauma Association Maternal Mental Health Alliance: help and support Mind: postnatal depression NCT: postnatal depression in dads NICE: antenatal and postnatal mental health PANDAS Do you feel you can't go on? If you are feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope, here are the people who can help Feeling depressed after childbirth It's normal to experience the 'baby blues' but postnatal depression can be very distressing. Here's where to get help Community content from HealthUnlocked Find postnatal depression information and support Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postnatal psychosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postpartum-psychosis","content":"Postpartum (after childbirth) psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postpartum psychosis   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postpartum-psychosis Community Postpartum psychosis (psychosis after childbirth) Introduction  Postpartum psychosis is a severe mental illness that can affect a woman after she has a baby. It causes her to have hallucinations and delusional thinking (symptoms of psychosis). Postpartum psychosis is thought to affect around one in every 1,000 women who give birth. It's sometimes referred to as puerperal psychosis or postnatal psychosis. Read on to find out: What are the symptoms? How serious can it be? Who is at risk? What should I do if I think someone has developed postpartum psychosis? What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? How is it treated? What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? Can it be prevented? What's the outlook? What support is available? What are the symptoms of postpartum psychosis? Most women with postpartum psychosis will experience psychosis (a 'psychotic episode') and other symptoms very soon after giving birth, usually within the first two weeks. Some women develop symptoms later than this \u2013 sometimes at the time they stop breastfeeding, or when their periods restart. Psychosis Psychosis causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. The two main symptoms are: hallucinations \u2013 usually hearing or seeing things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true (for example believing you've won the lottery) The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can severely disrupt her perception, thinking, emotions and behaviour. Other symptoms A woman with postpartum psychosis may also behave in a way that is out of character, and may experience: a high mood (mania) \u2013 she may talk and think too much or too quickly, feel 'on top of the world', or be more sociable than normal a loss of inhibitions paranoia, feeling suspicious or fearful restlessness or agitation a low mood \u2013 she may show signs of depression and be withdrawn or tearful, with a lack of energy, loss of appetite, anxiety, irritability or trouble sleeping severe confusion Her mood may change rapidly. Some affected women experience symptoms of mania and depression at the same time. How serious can it be? Postpartum psychosis is a serious mental illness that should be treated as a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, the postpartum psychosis can get worse rapidly.  The illness could cause her to neglect or harm her baby or harm herself. She may not realise she is ill, and it may be up to her partner, family or friends to spot the warning signs and take action \u2013 see What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis?'. The majority of women with postpartum psychosis make a full recovery, and often very quickly provided they receive the right treatment. Who is at risk of postpartum psychosis? Postpartum psychosis is more likely to affect women who: have had postpartum psychosis before already have a serious mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia have a relative who has experienced psychosis (even if the woman herself has no mental illness) Once a woman develops postpartum psychosis, there's a high chance she will have another episode following future pregnancies. What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis? Contact your GP immediately if you think someone you know may have developed postnatal psychosis. If this isn't possible, call NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service. If you think there's a danger of imminent harm, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? If you already have a care plan because you've been assessed to be at high risk, there should be an emergency number you can call to reach a crisis team. If you don't have a care plan, and think you're having a psychotic episode, see your GP urgently or go to A&E. How is postpartum psychosis treated? Postpartum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency. The woman may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Ideally, she would be admitted with her baby to a specialist psychiatric unit called a mother and baby unit. For some women, this allows them to continue bonding with their baby and gives them confidence in their role as mother. Medication Typically, a woman with postpartum psychosis would be prescribed one or more of the following drugs: An antidepressant, which works by balancing mood-altering chemicals in the brain. It can help ease symptoms such as low mood, irritability, lack of concentration and sleeplessness, allowing the mother to function normally and cope better with her new baby. An antipsychotic (neuroleptic), which works by blocking the effect of dopamine (a chemical that transmits messages in the brain). A mood stabilising drug. If lithium is prescribed, regular blood tests are needed at least every three months to make sure lithium levels are not too high or low. Doctors will weigh up the effectiveness of these medications with the risk of side effects and the risk of any harmful effects on pregnancy or breastfeeding. What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? We're not really sure what causes postpartum psychosis. Fluctuations in hormones and sleep patterns could play a role, and there does seem to be a genetic basis, as a woman is more likely to develop the illness if her close relative had it. There seems to be link between postpartum psychosis and bipolar disorder. It's important to understand that postpartum psychosis is not caused by anything the woman did, nor is it caused by stress, relationship problems or a baby being unwanted. Can postpartum psychosis be prevented? A woman's risk of developing postpartum psychosis should be assessed during her antenatal appointments so that if she were to develop the illness after giving birth, the signs would be spotted straight away and there would be a treatment plan to follow. There are no specific screening tools for postpartum psychosis, but the antenatal care team should be able to identify women who are more likely to develop it and refer them to a psychiatrist for an assessment. If you're at high risk... If you've been assessed to be at high risk of developing postpartum psychosis, you may be offered a pre-birth planning meeting at around 32 weeks of pregnancy. Everyone involved in your care would be invited to this meeting \u2013 your partner, family or friends, a mental health professional, midwife, obstetrician, health visitor and GP.  The aim is to make everyone aware of your risk and to agree on a plan for your care. Studies suggest that taking certain medicines in late pregnancy could help to prevent postpartum psychosis in high-risk women. You may want to discuss this option with your care team. The risks and benefits of medication taken in pregnancy should always be carefully weighed up. You may also be given advice on what you can do to stay as well as possible during pregnancy \u2013 for example, reducing any stress in your life, and getting as much sleep as possible. You'll get a copy of your written care plan, which should include how you and your family can get help quickly if you were to become ill \u2013 see What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? In the first few weeks after your baby is born, you should be regularly visited by a midwife, health visitor and mental health nurse. What's the outlook for someone with postpartum psychosis? With treatment, the vast majority of women with postpartum psychosis start to feel better very quickly.  Some mothers have difficulty bonding with their baby after an episode of postpartum psychosis, but this doesn't usually last long. With support from family, friends and the mental health team, most women go on to have very good relationship with their child. About half of women who have postpartum psychosis will go on to have another episode in the future \u2013 not necessarily after having another child. In these cases, they should be able to get help quickly. With appropriate treatment, this risk can be reduced. An episode of postpartum psychosis is sometimes followed by period of depression, anxiety and low confidence. It might take a while to come to terms with what happened.  Further advice and support Women who have experienced or are experiencing postpartum psychosis may find the following charities and forums helpful: Action Postpartum Psychosis The Association for Post Natal Illness PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Postpartum psychosis can be stressful and distressing for partners, too. It can be isolating and lonely if both their baby and partner is in hospital. If you are struggling to cope because your partner is going through an episode of postpartum psychosis or recovering from this, don't be afraid to get help yourself. Talk to a mental health professional involved in your partner's care, or approach one of the above charities. Helping your partner recover from postpartum psychosis You can help your partner by: being calm and supportive taking time to listen to her helping with housework and cooking helping with child care and night time feeds letting her get as much sleep as possible letting others help with shopping and household chores so you have more family time together not having too many friends visiting keeping the home environment as calm and quiet as possible  Page last reviewed: 19\/09\/2014 Next review due: 19\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Psychosis Mental health problems and pregnancy The Mental Health Act Postnatal depression External links National Childbirth Trust PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Action Postpartum Psychosis Association for Post Natal Illness Community content from HealthUnlocked Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postpartum psychosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postpartum-psychosis","content":"Postpartum (after childbirth) psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postpartum psychosis   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postpartum-psychosis Community Postpartum psychosis (psychosis after childbirth) Introduction  Postpartum psychosis is a severe mental illness that can affect a woman after she has a baby. It causes her to have hallucinations and delusional thinking (symptoms of psychosis). Postpartum psychosis is thought to affect around one in every 1,000 women who give birth. It's sometimes referred to as puerperal psychosis or postnatal psychosis. Read on to find out: What are the symptoms? How serious can it be? Who is at risk? What should I do if I think someone has developed postpartum psychosis? What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? How is it treated? What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? Can it be prevented? What's the outlook? What support is available? What are the symptoms of postpartum psychosis? Most women with postpartum psychosis will experience psychosis (a 'psychotic episode') and other symptoms very soon after giving birth, usually within the first two weeks. Some women develop symptoms later than this \u2013 sometimes at the time they stop breastfeeding, or when their periods restart. Psychosis Psychosis causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. The two main symptoms are: hallucinations \u2013 usually hearing or seeing things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true (for example believing you've won the lottery) The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can severely disrupt her perception, thinking, emotions and behaviour. Other symptoms A woman with postpartum psychosis may also behave in a way that is out of character, and may experience: a high mood (mania) \u2013 she may talk and think too much or too quickly, feel 'on top of the world', or be more sociable than normal a loss of inhibitions paranoia, feeling suspicious or fearful restlessness or agitation a low mood \u2013 she may show signs of depression and be withdrawn or tearful, with a lack of energy, loss of appetite, anxiety, irritability or trouble sleeping severe confusion Her mood may change rapidly. Some affected women experience symptoms of mania and depression at the same time. How serious can it be? Postpartum psychosis is a serious mental illness that should be treated as a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, the postpartum psychosis can get worse rapidly.  The illness could cause her to neglect or harm her baby or harm herself. She may not realise she is ill, and it may be up to her partner, family or friends to spot the warning signs and take action \u2013 see What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis?'. The majority of women with postpartum psychosis make a full recovery, and often very quickly provided they receive the right treatment. Who is at risk of postpartum psychosis? Postpartum psychosis is more likely to affect women who: have had postpartum psychosis before already have a serious mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia have a relative who has experienced psychosis (even if the woman herself has no mental illness) Once a woman develops postpartum psychosis, there's a high chance she will have another episode following future pregnancies. What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis? Contact your GP immediately if you think someone you know may have developed postnatal psychosis. If this isn't possible, call NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service. If you think there's a danger of imminent harm, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? If you already have a care plan because you've been assessed to be at high risk, there should be an emergency number you can call to reach a crisis team. If you don't have a care plan, and think you're having a psychotic episode, see your GP urgently or go to A&E. How is postpartum psychosis treated? Postpartum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency. The woman may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Ideally, she would be admitted with her baby to a specialist psychiatric unit called a mother and baby unit. For some women, this allows them to continue bonding with their baby and gives them confidence in their role as mother. Medication Typically, a woman with postpartum psychosis would be prescribed one or more of the following drugs: An antidepressant, which works by balancing mood-altering chemicals in the brain. It can help ease symptoms such as low mood, irritability, lack of concentration and sleeplessness, allowing the mother to function normally and cope better with her new baby. An antipsychotic (neuroleptic), which works by blocking the effect of dopamine (a chemical that transmits messages in the brain). A mood stabilising drug. If lithium is prescribed, regular blood tests are needed at least every three months to make sure lithium levels are not too high or low. Doctors will weigh up the effectiveness of these medications with the risk of side effects and the risk of any harmful effects on pregnancy or breastfeeding. What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? We're not really sure what causes postpartum psychosis. Fluctuations in hormones and sleep patterns could play a role, and there does seem to be a genetic basis, as a woman is more likely to develop the illness if her close relative had it. There seems to be link between postpartum psychosis and bipolar disorder. It's important to understand that postpartum psychosis is not caused by anything the woman did, nor is it caused by stress, relationship problems or a baby being unwanted. Can postpartum psychosis be prevented? A woman's risk of developing postpartum psychosis should be assessed during her antenatal appointments so that if she were to develop the illness after giving birth, the signs would be spotted straight away and there would be a treatment plan to follow. There are no specific screening tools for postpartum psychosis, but the antenatal care team should be able to identify women who are more likely to develop it and refer them to a psychiatrist for an assessment. If you're at high risk... If you've been assessed to be at high risk of developing postpartum psychosis, you may be offered a pre-birth planning meeting at around 32 weeks of pregnancy. Everyone involved in your care would be invited to this meeting \u2013 your partner, family or friends, a mental health professional, midwife, obstetrician, health visitor and GP.  The aim is to make everyone aware of your risk and to agree on a plan for your care. Studies suggest that taking certain medicines in late pregnancy could help to prevent postpartum psychosis in high-risk women. You may want to discuss this option with your care team. The risks and benefits of medication taken in pregnancy should always be carefully weighed up. You may also be given advice on what you can do to stay as well as possible during pregnancy \u2013 for example, reducing any stress in your life, and getting as much sleep as possible. You'll get a copy of your written care plan, which should include how you and your family can get help quickly if you were to become ill \u2013 see What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? In the first few weeks after your baby is born, you should be regularly visited by a midwife, health visitor and mental health nurse. What's the outlook for someone with postpartum psychosis? With treatment, the vast majority of women with postpartum psychosis start to feel better very quickly.  Some mothers have difficulty bonding with their baby after an episode of postpartum psychosis, but this doesn't usually last long. With support from family, friends and the mental health team, most women go on to have very good relationship with their child. About half of women who have postpartum psychosis will go on to have another episode in the future \u2013 not necessarily after having another child. In these cases, they should be able to get help quickly. With appropriate treatment, this risk can be reduced. An episode of postpartum psychosis is sometimes followed by period of depression, anxiety and low confidence. It might take a while to come to terms with what happened.  Further advice and support Women who have experienced or are experiencing postpartum psychosis may find the following charities and forums helpful: Action Postpartum Psychosis The Association for Post Natal Illness PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Postpartum psychosis can be stressful and distressing for partners, too. It can be isolating and lonely if both their baby and partner is in hospital. If you are struggling to cope because your partner is going through an episode of postpartum psychosis or recovering from this, don't be afraid to get help yourself. Talk to a mental health professional involved in your partner's care, or approach one of the above charities. Helping your partner recover from postpartum psychosis You can help your partner by: being calm and supportive taking time to listen to her helping with housework and cooking helping with child care and night time feeds letting her get as much sleep as possible letting others help with shopping and household chores so you have more family time together not having too many friends visiting keeping the home environment as calm and quiet as possible  Page last reviewed: 19\/09\/2014 Next review due: 19\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Psychosis Mental health problems and pregnancy The Mental Health Act Postnatal depression External links National Childbirth Trust PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Action Postpartum Psychosis Association for Post Natal Illness Community content from HealthUnlocked Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Post-partum thyroiditis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thyroiditis","content":"Thyroiditis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thyroiditis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview thyroiditis Clinical trials thyroiditis Community Thyroiditis Introduction  Thyroiditis is the medical term for inflammation (swelling) of the thyroid gland, which can either cause abnormally high or low levels of thyroid hormones in the blood. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland found in the neck. It produces hormones that are released into the bloodstream to control the body's growth and metabolism. They affect processes such as heart rate and body temperature, and help convert food into energy to keep the body going. There are several different types of thyroiditis. The common types are: Hashimoto's thyroiditis (the most common) de Quervain's or subacute thyroiditis  post-partum thyroiditis (triggered after giving birth) silent or painless thyroiditis  drug-induced thyroiditis  radiation-induced thyroiditis  acute or infectious thyroiditis  The symptoms and treatment of these conditions are briefly described below.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis  Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition. This means your immune system mistakenly attacks your thyroid gland, causing it to gradually swell and become damaged. As the thyroid gland is slowly destroyed over time, it is unable to produce sufficient amounts of thyroid hormone. The medical term for low levels of thyroid hormone in the blood is hypothyroidism. This leads to symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, which are very general and can include: fatigue weight gain constipation dry skin depression The swollen thyroid gland may also cause a lump to form in your throat, known as a goitre. It may take months or even years for the condition to be detected, because the disease progresses very slowly. The cause of Hashimoto's thyroiditis is not understood, but it sometimes appears to run in families, suggesting your genes may make you more likely to develop the condition. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is also associated with other autoimmune conditions, such as Addison's disease and type 1 diabetes. It is usually seen in women aged 30 to 50.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis cannot be cured, so the low levels of thyroid hormone are usually permanent. However, the symptoms are often easily treated with the thyroid hormone replacement medication levothyroxine, which is usually taken for life. Surgery is only rarely needed, for instance if your goitre is particularly uncomfortable  or there are suspicions of cancer. Read about treating an underactive thyroid gland and treating goitre. De Quervain's (subacute) thyroiditis  De Quervain's thyroiditis (sometimes called subacute thyroiditis) is a painful swelling of the thyroid gland that is thought to be triggered by a viral infection, such as mumps or the flu.  It's most commonly seen in females aged 20 to 50. De Quervain's thyroiditis usually causes a fever and pain in the neck, jaw or ear. It can also cause your thyroid gland to release too much thyroid hormone into the blood (thyrotoxicosis), leading to symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), including: anxiety insomnia heart palpitations weight loss irritability The palpitations and shakes associated with thyrotoxicosis can be treated with a beta-blocker. The pain caused by de Quervain\u2019s thyroiditis can often be relieved with painkillers such as aspirin, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen. In the cases where these medications are ineffective, corticosteroid medication may be prescribed. De Quervain\u2019s thyroiditis settles down after a few days and is often followed by a spell of hypothyroidism lasting a few weeks or months, before the thyroid gland recovers completely. Very occasionally, the condition may recur or the low levels of thyroid hormones caused by it can be permanent and may require long-term treatment with thyroid hormone replacement medication. Post-partum thyroiditis  Like Hashimoto's thyroiditis, post-partum thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition, but it only happens in women who have recently given birth. In post-partum thyroiditis, your immune system attacks your thyroid gland within around six months of giving birth, causing a temporary rise in thyroid hormone levels (thyrotoxicosis) and symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. Then, after a few weeks, your thyroid gland becomes depleted of thyroid hormone, leading to low levels of thyroid hormone and symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. However, not every woman with post-partum thyroiditis will go through both these phases.  If low thyroid hormone levels are causing severe symptoms, you may need to take thyroid hormone replacement until the condition gets better. In most women with the condition, thyroid function returns to normal within 12 months after the baby is born, although the low thyroid hormone levels can sometimes be permanent. Silent (painless) thyroiditis  Silent thyroiditis is very similar to post-partum thyroiditis. It is also an autoimmune condition, but is not related to giving birth and can occur in both men and women. Like postpartum thyroiditis, there may be a phase of high thyroid hormone levels (thyrotoxicosis), causing symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland. This may then be followed by a phase of symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, before the symptoms eventually go away within around 12 to 18 months. If low thyroid hormone levels are causing severe symptoms, you may need to take thyroid hormone replacement until the condition gets better. In a few cases, the low thyroid levels can be permanent. Drug-induced thyroiditis  Thyroiditis can also be triggered by medications including interferon, amiodarone, lithium and a class of drugs to treat certain cancers (which include sunitinib), if these medicines damage the thyroid gland. There may be symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, but these are usually short-lived and may get better after you stop taking the medication causing the condition. However, you should not stop taking any medication that has been prescribed for you without first discussing it with your doctor. Drug-induced thyroiditis can sometimes cause pain in the area around the thyroid gland. This can often be relieved with NSAIDs, although corticosteroid medication may occasionally be needed. Radiation-induced thyroiditis  Radioactive iodine treatment for an overactive thyroid gland or radiotherapy for certain cancers can also damage the thyroid gland, leading to symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. The low levels of thyroid hormone after radioactive iodine is usually permanent, and may cause symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland that will need to be managed with lifelong thyroid hormone replacement treatment.  Acute or infectious thyroiditis  Acute or infectious thyroiditis is usually triggered by a bacterial infection. It is rare and is associated with either a weakened immune system or, in children, with a problem in the development of the thyroid. Symptoms may include pain in the throat, feeling generally unwell, swelling of the thyroid gland and sometimes symptoms of an overactive thyroid gland or symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland. These symptoms will usually get better when the infection is treated with antibiotics. In the meantime, thyroid pain can often be managed with NSAIDs. Children will usually require an operation to remove the abnormal part of the thyroid. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland found in the neck  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/09\/2014 Next review due: 26\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 81 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Underactive thyroid gland Overactive thyroid gland Goitre External links British Thyroid Foundation Lab Tests Online: thyroid function tests Underactive thyroid Hypothyroidism is usually treated by taking hormone-replacement tablets called levothyroxin Overactive thyroid Overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism, is a relatively common condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Post-polio syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Polio-and-post-polio-syndrome-","content":"Post-polio syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Post-polio syndrome   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Polio-and-post-polio-syndrome- Clinical trials Post-polio syndrome Polio-and-post-polio-syndrome- Symptoms Polio-and-post-polio-syndrome- Diagnosis Polio-and-post-polio-syndrome- Treatment Introduction  Post-polio syndrome is a poorly understood condition that can affect people who have had polio in the past. Polio is a viral infection that used to be common in the UK, but is rare nowadays. Most people who had polio would have fought off the infection without even realising they were infected. Some people with polio would have had paralysis, muscle weakness and shrinking of the muscles. But usually, these problems would have either gone away over the following weeks or months, or remained the same for years afterwards. Post-polio syndrome is where some of these symptoms return or get worse many years or decades after the original polio infection. Symptoms of post-polio syndrome Post-polio syndrome can include a wide range of symptoms that develop gradually over time, including: persistent fatigue (extreme tiredness) muscle weakness shrinking muscles muscle and joint pain sleep apnoea The condition can have a significant impact on everyday life, making it very difficult to get around and carry out certain tasks and activities. The symptoms tend to get gradually worse over many years, but this happens very slowly and treatment may help slow it down further. The condition is rarely life-threatening, although some people develop breathing and swallowing difficulties that can lead to serious problems, such as chest infections. Read more about the symptoms of post-polio syndrome and diagnosing post-polio syndrome. Who is affected Post-polio syndrome only affects people who have had polio. It usually develops 15 to 40 years after the infection. The condition has become more common in the UK in recent years, because of the high number of polio cases that occurred during the 1940s and 1950s, before routine vaccination was introduced. It's estimated that there are around 120,000 people living in the UK who survived polio when they were younger. Some of these have, or will develop, post-polio syndrome. It's not known exactly how many polio survivors are or will be affected by post-polio syndrome. Estimates vary from as low as 15% to as high as 80% What causes post-polio syndrome? The exact cause of post-polio syndrome is unclear. It's not known whether anything can be done to prevent it. The leading theory is that it's the result of the gradual deterioration of nerve cells in the spinal cord (motor neurones) that were damaged by the polio virus. This would explain why the condition can take years to appear. Post-polio syndrome isn't contagious. The theory that the polio virus may lie dormant in your body, causing post-polio syndrome when it becomes reactivated at a later stage, has been disproven. It's not clear why only some people who have had polio develop post-polio syndrome. Those who had severe polio when they were younger may be more likely to develop the condition. How post-polio syndrome is treated There's currently no cure for post-polio syndrome, but support and a range of treatments are available to help manage the symptoms and improve quality of life. Some of the ways that symptoms of post-polio syndrome may be managed include with: rest and exercise \u2013 such as learning to stop activities before becoming exhausted  mobility aids \u2013 such as walking sticks or scooters weight control and healthy eating \u2013 to avoid putting unnecessary strain on muscles and joints painkilling medication \u2013 to help relieve muscle or joint pain psychological support \u2013 such as discussions with a GP, on an online forum, or in a local support group Read more about treating post-polio syndrome. Help and support The British Polio Fellowship is a leading charity for people affected by polio and post-polio syndrome. It provides a range of useful resources, information and services. You can contact the telephone helpline on 0800 043 1935, or visit the British Polio Fellowship website. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 26\/08\/2015 Next review due: 26\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 223 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 63  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 35  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Information and support for carers Living with disability NHS vaccination schedule Polio Sleep apnoea External links British Polio Fellowship Polio Survivors Network What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Caring for an older disabled relative Financial, practical and emotional support is available for those who care for an older relative NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Post-traumatic stress disorder","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Post-traumatic-stress-disorder","content":"Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Real stories Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Clinical trials Post-traumatic stress disorder Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Symptoms Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Causes Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Treatment Post-traumatic-stress-disorder Complex PTSD Introduction  Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder caused by very stressful, frightening or distressing events. Someone with PTSD often relives the traumatic event through nightmares and flashbacks, and may experience feelings of isolation, irritability and guilt. They may also have problems sleeping, such as insomnia, and find concentrating difficult. These symptoms are often severe and persistent enough to have a significant impact on the person\u2019s day-to-day life. Read more about the symptoms of PTSD. Causes of PTSD The type of events that can cause PTSD include: serious road accidents violent personal assaults, such as sexual assault, mugging or robbery prolonged sexual abuse, violence or severe neglect witnessing violent deaths military combat being held hostage terrorist attacks natural disasters, such as severe floods, earthquakes or tsunamis PTSD can develop immediately after someone experiences a disturbing event or it can occur weeks, months or even years later. PTSD is estimated to affect about 1 in every 3 people who have a traumatic experience, but it's not clear exactly why some people develop the condition and others don't. Read more about the causes of PTSD. Complex PTSD People who repeatedly experience traumatic situations such as severe neglect, abuse or violence may be diagnosed with complex PTSD. Complex PTSD can cause similar symptoms to PTSD and may not develop until years after the event. It's often more severe if the trauma was experienced early in life as this can affect a child's development. Read more about complex PTSD. When to seek medical advice It's normal to experience upsetting and confusing thoughts after a traumatic event, but most people improve naturally over a few weeks. You should visit your GP if you or your child are still having problems about four weeks after the traumatic experience, or if the symptoms are particularly troublesome. If necessary, your GP can refer you to mental health specialists for further assessment and treatment. How PTSD is treated PTSD can be successfully treated, even when it develops many years after a traumatic event. Any treatment depends on the severity of symptoms and how soon they occur after the traumatic event. Any of the following treatment options may be recommended: Watchful waiting \u2013 monitoring your symptoms to see whether they improve or get worse without treatment. Psychotherapy \u2013 such as trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) or eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR). Find psychotherapy services near you. Antidepressants \u2013 such as paroxetine or mirtazapine. Read more about treating PTSD. History of PTSD Cases of PTSD were first documented during the First World War when soldiers developed shell shock as a result of the harrowing conditions in the trenches. But the condition wasn't officially recognised as a mental health condition until 1980, when it was included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, developed by the American Psychiatric Association. Page last reviewed: 06\/09\/2015 Next review due: 06\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 489 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 109  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 57  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 110  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful PTSD: Lisa's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Lisa French was on the London bus that was attacked in the July 7 bombings. Two years later, she was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder. Watch Lisa's story. Media last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Useful links NHS Choices links Anxiety CBT Depression Psychotherapy Find mental health services External links Combat Stress Mental Health Foundation Mind: understanding PTSD Moodjuice: PTSD self-help guide PTSD Resolution: veteran outreach programme Rape Crisis Victim Support NAPAC: supporting recovery from childhood abuse Find mental health support Anxious, depressed or having problems coping? Find out how to get help Online mental health treatments Flexible and effective NHS-approved treatments for depression, anxiety and more Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postural-tachycardia-syndrome","content":"Postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Postural tachycardia syndrome   Postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS) is an abnormal increase in heart rate that occurs after sitting up or standing. It typically causes dizziness, fainting and other symptoms. It's sometimes known as postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. PoTS affects many different people, but is most common in girls and women aged 15 to 50. Some people have mild symptoms, while others find the condition affects their quality of life. PoTS often improves gradually over time, and there are a number of self-care measures and medications that can help. This page covers: What happens in PoTS Symptoms When to get medical advice Tests and diagnosis Treatments Causes Links to more information What happens in PoTS Normally when you sit up or stand, gravity pulls some of your blood down to your belly area, hands and feet. In response, your blood vessels quickly narrow and your heart rate increases slightly to maintain blood flow to the heart and brain, and prevent blood pressure dropping. This is all done without needing to think about it by the autonomic nervous system \u2013 the nervous system in charge of automatic body functions. In PoTS, the autonomic nervous system doesn't work properly. There's a drop in blood supply to the heart and brain when you become upright and the heart races to compensate for this. Symptoms of PoTS You can develop PoTS suddenly, or it can come on gradually over time. It causes a range of symptoms that occur within a few minutes of sitting up or standing. Lying down may relieve some of the symptoms. Typical symptoms of PoTS include: dizziness or light-headedness fainting heart palpitations shaking and sweating weakness and fatigue headaches poor sleep chest pain feeling sick shortness of breath Some people notice that things such as feeling hot, eating, strenuous exercise and being on their period make their symptoms worse. When to get medical advice See your GP if you think you have PoTS. The symptoms can have a number of causes, such as medication or low blood pressure, so it's a good idea to get a proper diagnosis. Sometimes it can be misdiagnosed as anxiety or panic attacks. Some doctors may not be aware of PoTS, so it may help to print out this page and take it with you to the consultation. Your GP will probably need to refer you to a specialist for tests (see below). PoTS UK has a list of doctors with an interest in PoTS that you can use to find a specialist near you. You can't usually self-refer to these doctors, but you could discuss a referral with your GP. Tests for PoTS A diagnosis of PoTS is made if your heart rate increases by 30 beats per minute (bpm) or more (40bpm in those aged 12-19) after 10 minutes of standing, or if it increases to more than 120bpm. You may have a range of tests to confirm a diagnosis and rule out other conditions, including: the tilt table test \u2013 your heart rate and blood pressure are measured while lying on a bed, and the bed is then tilted into a more upright position while further measurements are taken the active stand test \u2013 your heart rate and blood pressure are measured after lying down, immediately upon standing, and after 2, 5 and 10 minutes an electrocardiogram (ECG) \u2013 a test of your heart's electrical activity an echocardiogram \u2013 an ultrasound scan of your heart 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure and heart rate monitoring \u2013 small devices attached to your belt take regular readings while you're doing normal activities blood tests \u2013 to test your kidney, liver and thyroid function, and measure blood count and your calcium and glucose levels Treatments for PoTS Self-care measures can sometimes help reduce the symptoms of PoTS. If these don't work, you may need to take medication. Treating an episode If you suddenly feel faint or dizzy, you can try countering the fall in blood flow by: lying down and, if you can, raising your legs crossing your legs in front of each other while standing, rocking up and down on your toes, clenching your buttocks and tummy muscles and\/or clenching your fists if you're unable to lie down Reducing your symptoms You may be able to reduce your symptoms in the long-term by following this advice: drink plenty of fluids until your urine is pale yellow keep active, but pace yourself and choose your exercise wisely \u2013 swimming, rowing, lower limb resistance training, walking, jogging and pilates can help you keep fit and build muscle (strong calf muscles should help pump blood back to your heart) elevate the head end of your bed, so you're not sleeping fully horizontal try wearing support tights or other forms of compression clothing, to improve blood flow in your legs  avoid long periods of standing come up from lying slowly \u2013 sit for a while before standing avoid drinking lots of caffeine or alcohol include more salt in your diet \u2013 this isn't advisable if you have high blood pressure or kidney or heart disease though, so ask your specialist first The PoTS UK website has more general advice about reducing your symptoms and the charity STARS has information about managing your symptoms. Medication There's currently no medication licensed for the treatment of PoTS, but your specialist might suggest trying a medication \"off label\", such as: a beta-blocker or ivabradine \u2013 which decreases the heart rate midodrine \u2013 which narrows the blood vessels fludrocortisone \u2013 which decreases the amount of sodium lost in your urine selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) \u2013 a type of antidepressant that can affect how your nervous system works If a medicine is used \"off label\", it means it hasn't undergone clinical trials for this use, but many experts believe it's likely to be effective and your doctor will discuss the possible benefits and risks with you. Causes of PoTS In many cases, the cause of the problem with the nervous system in people with PoTS is unknown. Teenagers will sometimes develop PoTS and find it gradually disappears a few years later. Sometimes it can develop suddenly after a viral illness or traumatic event, or during or after pregnancy. Some of the other known causes are: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 a condition (often inherited) that results in unusually flexible joints and abnormally elastic blood vessels other underlying conditions \u2013 such as diabetes, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, lupus, Sjogren's syndrome or cancer poisoning \u2013 with alcohol or certain metals inheriting a faulty gene that causes too much of the \"fight or flight\" hormone noradrenaline to be produced PoTS also occurs quite commonly alongside chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). More information and advice The following organisations can provide more information, support and advice for people with PoTS. POTS UK Syncope Trust And Reflex anoxic Seizures (STARS) Information about you If you or your child has PoTS, your clinical team may pass information about you\/your child on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 09\/08\/2016 Next review due: 09\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 206 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 111  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Dizziness Heart palpitations Joint hypermobility External links PoTS UK Syncope Trust And Reflex anoxic Seizures (STARS) Fainting Find out what causes fainting and what to do if someone has fainted Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Potassium test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Potassium-test","content":"Potassium test - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Potassium test  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Potassium test Introduction  A potassium test measures the amount of potassium in blood serum (the fluid part of your blood). Potassium is a mineral that helps: nerves and muscles \"communicate\" nutrients move into cells and waste products move out of cells the heart function healthily A potassium test may be recommended to help diagnose or monitor kidney disease, which is the most common cause of high potassium levels. Your doctor may also recommend the test if you have heart-related problems, such as high blood pressure (hypertension). If you have low potassium levels, you may have a heart problem, such as an irregular heartbeat. If you have high potassium levels, your heart muscle activity may be reduced. Both situations are serious and can be life-threatening. You may also have a potassium test if you have diabetes and your doctor thinks you may have diabetic ketoacidosis (a complication caused by a lack of insulin in the body). In rare cases, potassium levels may be low through poor diet. Good sources of dietary potassium include: fruit, particularly bananas vegetables pulses nuts and seeds milk fish shellfish beef chicken turkey bread Read more about the potassium test at Lab Tests Online UK. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2015 Next review due: 02\/10\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 227 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 95  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices link Chronic kidney disease Diabetic ketoacidosis External link Lab Tests Online UK Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Healthy eating Information on how to achieve a balanced diet, tips to help you get your 5 A DAY, plus advice for vegetarians NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prader-Willi syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/prader-willi-syndrome","content":"Prader-Willi syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prader-Willi syndrome  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview prader-willi-syndrome Clinical trials Prader-Willi syndrome prader-willi-syndrome Problems prader-willi-syndrome Causes prader-willi-syndrome Diagnosis prader-willi-syndrome Management Introduction  Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic condition that causes a wide range of problems. These may include: a constant desire to eat food, which seems driven by a permanent feeling of hunger and can easily lead to dangerous weight gain restricted growth, leading to short stature reduced muscle tone (hypotonia) learning difficulties lack of sexual development behavioural problems, such as temper tantrums or stubbornness Read more about problems associated with Prader-Willi syndrome. What causes Prader-Willi syndrome? Prader-Willi syndrome is caused by a genetic defect on chromosome number 15, which happens purely by chance. The condition is rare, affecting no more than one in every 15,000 children born in England. Boys and girls of all ethnic backgrounds may be affected. Read more about the causes of Prader-Willi syndrome. Diagnosing Prader-Willi syndrome Prader-Willi syndrome can usually be confirmed by carrying out genetic tests. A checklist of symptoms that are typical of Prader-Willi syndrome is often used to identify children who should be tested. Read more about how Prader-Willi syndrome is diagnosed. Living with Prader-Willi syndrome There's no cure for Prader-Willi syndrome, so treatment aims to manage the symptoms and associated problems. For parents, this includes dealing with their child's excessive eating and behavioural problems. Trying to get your child to stick to a healthy, balanced diet and maintain a normal weight is one of the most important parts of caring for a child with Prader-Willi syndrome. It's also probably one of the most challenging and frustrating. If children are allowed to eat as much as they want, they'll quickly become dangerously overweight. A child with the syndrome can eat three to six times more than other children of the same age and still feel hungry. However restricting a child's diet is not easy. They can be highly obsessive when it comes to eating, and their hunger can cause them to hide or steal food. Read more about managing Prader-Willi syndrome. Outlook While Prader-Willi syndrome itself isn't life- threatening, the compulsive eating and resulting weight gain can be. Young adults with the syndrome often develop obesity-related conditions usually seen in older adults, such as type 2 diabetes and heart failure. If the obesity isn't treated, a person with the syndrome will probably die a lot younger than would normally be expected. Compulsive eating can also cause health problems such as an abnormally expanded stomach and choking. Due to the potential risk of choking, all parents of a child with Prader-Willi syndrome are advised to learn the Heimlich manoeuvre.  Read more about what to do if someone is choking. If a child with Prader-Willi syndrome is able to follow a restricted diet and control their weight, there's no reason why they can't enjoy a good quality of life and take part in activities such as voluntary or part-time work. However, because of their behavioural problems and learning difficulties, it's unlikely they'll be able to live fully independent lives. PWSA UK The Prader-Willi Syndrome Association UK (PWSA UK) provides information and support for people whose lives are affected by PWS. You can call the PWSA helpline on 01332 365676. Information about your child If your child has Prader-Willi syndrome, your clinical team will pass information about him or her on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Special needs in children If your child has a health condition or disability, they may need specialised healthcare and help at school Page last reviewed: 28\/11\/2014 Next review due: 28\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 92 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 55  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Children with a learning disability Difficult behaviour in children Losing weight Obesity What should I do if someone is choking? External links Prader-Willi Syndrome Association (UK) Very overweight children: advice for parents Practical advice for parents of very overweight children, including tips on healthy eating and suitable physical activity Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Preconception","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/pregnancy-and-baby-care.aspx","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Predictive genetic test for cancer risk genes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/predictive-genetic-tests-cancer","content":"Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Predictive genetic tests for cancer risk genes Introduction  Cancer is not usually inherited, but some types \u2013 mainly breast, ovarian, colorectal and prostate cancer \u2013 can be strongly influenced by genes and can run in families.  We all carry certain genes that are normally protective against cancer \u2013 they correct any DNA damage that naturally occurs when cells divide. Inheriting faulty versions or \"variants\" of these genes significantly raises your risk of developing cancer, because the altered genes cannot repair the damaged cells, which can build up and form a tumour. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are two examples of genes that raise your cancer risk if they become altered. Having a variant BRCA gene greatly increases a woman's chance of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer. This was the reason Angelina Jolie had preventative breast cancer surgery, followed by ovarian cancer surgery. They also increase a man's chance of developing male breast cancer and prostate cancer.  BRCA genes are not the only cancer risk genes. Researchers recently identified more than 100 new gene variants associated with an increased risk of breast, prostate and ovarian cancer. Individually, these new gene variants only slightly increase the risk of cancer, but a combination could mean a high risk overall. If you or your partner have a high-risk cancer gene, such as an altered version of BRCA1, it can be passed on to any children you have.  If you're concerned, read on. This page covers: What to do if you're worried  Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  What testing involves  What a positive result means   Managing your risk  Telling close relatives  Planning a family  Paying for private testing What to do if you're worried  Speak to your GP if cancer runs in your family and you're worried you may get it too. They may refer you to a local genetics service for an NHS genetic test, which will tell you if you have inherited one of the cancer risk genes.  This type of testing is known as predictive genetic testing. It's \"predictive\" because a positive result means you have a greatly increased risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you have cancer or are definitely going to develop it. You may be eligible for this NHS test if the faulty gene has already been identified in one of your relatives, or if there is a strong family history of cancer in your family. See What testing involves, below. Pros and cons of having a predictive genetic test  Not everyone who is eligible for the NHS test will want to have it. It's a personal decision, and should only be made after you've had genetic counselling sessions and talked through what having the test means, how you may feel and how you will cope. Advantages a positive result means you can take steps to manage your risk of developing cancer \u2013 you can make certain lifestyle changes to lower your risk, have regular screening and have preventative treatment (see Managing your risk, below) knowing the result may reduce any stress and anxiety that comes from not knowing Disadvantages the results of some genetic tests are inconclusive \u2013 doctors may identify a variation in a gene, but not know what effect it may have a positive result may cause permanent anxiety \u2013 some people would rather not know about their risk and only want to be told if they actually develop cancer What testing involves   There are usually two steps to genetic testing: A relative with cancer has a diagnostic blood test to see if they have a cancer risk gene (this normally must happen before any healthy relatives are tested). Their result will be ready four to eight weeks later. If your relative's test is positive, you can have the predictive genetic test to see if you have the same faulty gene. Your GP will refer you to your local genetics service for the blood test (you'll need a copy of your relative's test results). The result will take up to two weeks to come through after a blood sample is taken, but this may not happen at your first appointment. This test is fully predictive as a \"clear\" negative test, which will mean you have not inherited the family high risk of cancer. The charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer explains the importance of these two steps: \"Without looking at the genes of an affected relative first, testing a healthy individual would be like reading through an entire book looking for a spelling mistake without knowing where the mistake is, or if there is a mistake at all.\" When there are no affected relatives available, full testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 may be possible for those with at least a 10% chance of having a genetic fault. This usually means having a very strong family history of early onset breast and particularly ovarian cancer. It takes four to eight weeks to get the result, but this is not fully predictive as a negative test, so cannot rule out that the problem in relatives is due to a different gene. What a positive result means  If your predictive genetic test result is positive, it means you have a faulty gene that raises your risk of developing cancer. It doesn't mean you are guaranteed to get cancer \u2013 your genes only partly influence your future health risks. Other factors, such as your medical history, lifestyle and your environment, also play a role. If you have one of the faulty BRCA genes, there is a 50% chance you will pass this on to any children you have and a 50% chance that each of your siblings also has it. You may want to discuss your results with other members of your family, who may also be affected. The genetics clinic will discuss with you how a positive or negative result will affect your life and your relationships with your family. You can read more about this in the beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 866kb) produced by The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust. Insurance companies cannot ask you to disclose the results of predictive genetic tests for the majority of policies, but this may change in the future. Managing your risk   If your test result is positive, you have a range of options to manage your risk. Risk-reducing surgery is not the only option. Ultimately, there's no right or wrong answer about what you should do \u2013 it's a decision only you can make. Regularly examining your breasts If you have the faulty BRCA1\/2 gene, it's a good idea to be aware of changes in your breasts. Read more about being breast cancer aware. This advice applies to men with a faulty BRCA2 gene too, as they are also at increased risk of breast cancer (although to a lesser extent). Screening In the case of breast cancer, annual breast screening in the form of mammograms and MRI scans can also monitor your condition and catch cancer early, if it does develop. Detecting breast cancer at an early stage means it may be easier to treat. The chance of making a full recovery from breast cancer, especially if it is detected early, is relatively high compared with other forms of cancer. Unfortunately, there's currently no reliable screening test for ovarian cancer or prostate cancer. Read more about screening for prostate cancer. However, annual PSA tests for prostate cancer may benefit men who carry the faulty BRCA2 gene. Lifestyle changes Changes in your lifestyle can sometimes reduce your individual cancer risk. These include taking plenty of exercise and eating a healthy diet. If you have a faulty BRCA gene, be aware of other factors that could increase your risk of breast cancer. It's recommended that you avoid: the oral contraceptive pill if you are over 35 combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) if you\u2019re over 50 drinking more than the maximum recommended daily limits of alcohol being overweight The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) also recommends that women with a family history of breast cancer breastfeed their children, if possible. Read about the things that may help to prevent ovarian cancer. Medication (chemoprevention) NICE has recommended treatment with tamoxifen or raloxifene for a specific group of women who have a high risk of developing breast cancer. These medicines can reduce the risk of breast cancer for up to 20 years from five years of taking them. For more information, read the article: Drugs to be offered to women at high risk of breast cancer, which also explains the side effects these medicines can cause. Read the full NICE 2013 guidelines on familial breast cancer.   Risk-reducing surgery Risk-reducing surgery means removing all the tissue (such as the breasts or ovaries) that could become cancerous. Carriers of a faulty BRCA gene may wish to consider a preventative mastectomy.   Women who have risk-reducing mastectomies reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by around 90%. However, a mastectomy is a major operation and recovering from it can be physically and emotionally difficult. Surgery can also be used to reduce ovarian cancer risk. Women who have their ovaries removed before the menopause not only dramatically reduce their risk of developing ovarian cancer, but also reduce their risk of developing breast cancer by up to 50%. However, this will trigger an early menopause and mean you're not able to have your own children (unless you store eggs or embryos). Read more about surgery to remove the ovaries, including the risks and after-effects. The risk of ovarian cancer in women who carry a BRCA gene fault does not begin to rise significantly until about the age of 40. Therefore, carriers of the faulty gene who are younger than 40 usually wait to have this operation. Telling close relatives   Your genetics unit will not approach your relatives about your result \u2013 it will usually be up to you to tell your family. You may be given a standard letter to share with relatives, which explains your test result and contains all the information they need to be referred for the test themselves. However, not everyone will want to have the genetic test. Women who are closely related to you (such as your sister or daughter) can have cancer screening without having genetic testing. Planning a family  Cancer risk genes can be passed on to any children you have. If your predictive genetic test is positive and you want to start a family, you have several options. You can: Have your children without any intervention, and risk your child inheriting the faulty gene. Adopt a baby. Use donor eggs or donor sperm (depending on who carries the faulty gene) to avoid passing on the faulty gene. Have prenatal testing, which is a test done in pregnancy that reveals whether your baby has the faulty gene. You can then plan to continue or terminate the pregnancy, depending on the test result. Have pre-implantation genetic diagnosis \u2013 a technique used to select embryos that have not inherited the faulty gene. However, there is no guarantee this technique will result in a successful pregnancy, and funding for it on the NHS may not be available to all patients. Paying for private testing If there isn't a strong family history of cancer in your family and the faulty gene hasn't otherwise been identified in any of your relatives, you won't be eligible for the NHS genetic test. You'll have to pay for it privately if you still wish to have the test. Consider this carefully, because: if you don't have any family history of cancer, it's unlikely you have one of the faulty genes the tests can be expensive, potentially costing up to £500-2,000 or more there's no guarantee they will predict whether you'll develop cancer you may not be offered genetic counselling to help you make a decision and support you once you get your results About BRCA1 and BRCA2 If you have a fault (mutation) in one of the BRCA genes, your risk of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer is greatly increased.   Women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, for example, have a 60-90% lifetime risk of breast cancer and a 40-60% risk of ovarian cancer. In other words, out of every 100 women with the faulty BRCA1 gene, between 60 and 90 will develop breast cancer in their lifetime and between 40 and 60 will develop ovarian cancer. The faulty BRCA genes affect around 1 in every 400 people, but people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent are at a much higher risk (as many as 1 in 40 may carry the faulty gene). For more information, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust has produced a beginner's guide to BRCA1 and BRCA2 (PDF, 867kb). Page last reviewed: 05\/05\/2015 Next review due: 05\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 83 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 54  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Breast cancer Mastectomy Ovarian cancer Prostate cancer External links Cancer Research UK: genes and cancer Macmillan: genetic testing News analysis: Angelina Jolie's breast cancer surgery Actress Angelina Jolie has had a double mastectomy to reduce her high genetic risk of breast cancer. We explain the science behind the headlines Faulty genes and breast cancer The genes associated with breast cancer, what it means to have a faulty gene, and who gets tested NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pre-eclampsia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pre-eclampsia","content":"Pre-eclampsia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pre-eclampsia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pre-eclampsia Clinical trials Pre-eclampsia Community Pre-eclampsia Pre-eclampsia Symptoms Pre-eclampsia Causes Pre-eclampsia Diagnosis Pre-eclampsia Treatment Pre-eclampsia Complications Introduction  Pre-eclampsia is a condition that affects some pregnant women, usually during the second half of pregnancy (from around 20 weeks) or soon after their baby is delivered. Early signs of pre-eclampsia include having high blood pressure (hypertension) and protein in your urine (proteinuria). It's unlikely that you'll notice these signs, but they should be picked up during your routine antenatal appointments. In some cases, further symptoms can develop, including: swelling of the feet, ankles, face and hands caused by fluid retention (oedema) severe headache vision problems pain just below the ribs If you notice any symptoms of pre-eclampsia, seek medical advice immediately by calling your midwife, GP surgery or NHS 111. Although many cases are mild, the condition can lead to serious complications for both mother and baby if it's not monitored and treated (see below). The earlier pre-eclampsia is diagnosed and monitored, the better the outlook for mother and baby. Read more about the symptoms of pre-eclampsia and diagnosing pre-eclampsia. Who is affected? Mild pre-eclampsia affects up to 6% of pregnancies, and severe cases develop in about 1-2% of pregnancies. There are a number of things that can increase your chances of developing pre-eclampsia, such as: having diabetes, high blood pressure or kidney disease before starting pregnancy having another condition, such as lupus or antiphospholipid syndrome having developed the condition during a previous pregnancy Other things that can slightly increase your chances of developing pre-eclampsia include: having a family history of the condition being over 40 years old it having been at least 10 years since your last pregnancy expecting multiple babies (twins or triplets) having a body mass index (BMI) of 35 or over If you have two or more of these together, then your chances are higher. If you're thought to be at a high risk of developing pre-eclampsia, you may be advised to take a daily dose of low-dose aspirin from the 12th week of pregnancy until your baby is delivered. What causes pre-eclampsia? Although the exact cause of pre-eclampsia isn't known, it's thought to occur when there's a problem with the placenta (the organ that links the baby's blood supply to the mother's). Read more about the causes of pre-eclampsia. Treating pre-eclampsia If you're diagnosed with pre-eclampsia, you should be referred for an assessment by a specialist, usually in hospital. While in hospital, you'll be monitored closely to determine how severe the condition is and whether a hospital stay is needed. The only way to cure pre-eclampsia is to deliver the baby, so you'll usually be monitored regularly until it's possible for your baby to be delivered. This will normally be at around 37-38 weeks of pregnancy, but it may be earlier in more severe cases. At this point, labour may be started artificially (induced) or you may have a caesarean section. Medication may be recommended to lower your blood pressure while you wait for your baby to be delivered. Read more about treating pre-eclampsia. Complications Although most cases of pre-eclampsia cause no problems and improve soon after the baby is delivered, there's a risk of serious complications that can affect both the mother and her baby. There's a risk that the mother will develop fits called \"eclampsia\". These fits can be life-threatening for the mother and baby, but they're rare. Read more about the complications of pre-eclampsia. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 02\/06\/2015 Next review due: 02\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 285 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 159  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 72  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antenatal care Caesarean section High blood pressure Pregnancy and baby guide External links Action on Pre-eclampsia Bliss: the premature baby charity NCT SANDS: stillbirth and neonatal death charity Tommy's: the baby charity Get pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week emails about your pregnancy and baby, with advice from experts, mums and dads Find and choose services for Pre-eclampsia Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy and baby guide","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby","content":"Your pregnancy and baby - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Your pregnancy and baby guide Am I pregnant? What should I be eating? Is it normal to be this tired? How can I help my partner during labour? Whatever you want to know about getting pregnant, being pregnant or caring for your new baby, you should find it here. You'll find detailed week-by-week guides and lots of expert videos, parents' tips and interactive tools to explore. Before you start, why not: work out when your baby is due with our due date calculator    log in to create your own personalised birth plan  Want to know if you're really pregnant? Got any of the signs and symptoms of pregnancy? Read our guide on finding out if you're pregnant. Find out about pregnancy tests, or your next steps if you've had a positive pregnancy test. Also, find out more about getting help if you're not getting pregnant. Keeping well in pregnancy everything you need to know about a healthy pregnancy diet and supplements in pregnancy smoking and drinking can harm an unborn baby \u2013 read our stop smoking and alcohol pages for help trying to quit  Antenatal care and the baby's development find out as much as you can about what's happening inside you in the first few weeks of pregnancy how to cope with all those common pregnancy problems, like morning sickness, tiredness and headaches  find out all about the ultrasound scans and checks and tests you'll be offered as part of your antenatal care, including screening for Down's syndrome Vaccinations in pregnancy Why it's recommended that women have the flu vaccine in pregnancy and whooping cough vaccine in pregnancy. Labour and birth Find out all you need to know about labour and birth, including where you can have your baby \u2013 for example, either in a hospital, midwife-led unit, or at home \u2013 and what pain relief is available, such as gas and air (entonox) and epidural.  Your new baby When your baby arrives, you can find advice on all the essentials of baby care, including breastfeeding, bottle feeding, changing nappies, and washing your baby. Plus: find out how to cope with a crying baby and get tips on settling them into a good sleep routine as a new mum, find out about the possible changes to your body and your relationships, and know how to spot the symptoms of postnatal depression if you have twins or multiples, find out about feeding, getting out and about, and sleep issues Feeding, teething and tantrums find out about all aspects of parenting, including support and services, keeping fit, and going back to work know the signs of serious illness in babies and the symptoms of infectious illnesses such as chickenpox find out how to keep your baby safe and what to do if they have an accident at six months old your baby will need to start solid foods, so be prepared with our weaning tips and first food ideas as your baby becomes a toddler, get tips on teething, the importance of play, temper tantrums and potty training Want to share your pregnancy and baby experiences? Connect with others who can offer practical and emotional support about any pregnancy and baby issues on the HealthUnlocked NCT forum. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 270 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 112  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Calculate your due date Type in the start date of your last period and the length of your menstrual cycle. This tool will do the rest Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy and parenting from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Accident and emergency services Dentists GP Hospital Maternity services Mental Health Information and Support Parenting information and support Pharmacy Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Amniocentesis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Amniocentesis","content":"Amniocentesis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Amniocentesis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Amniocentesis Clinical trials Amniocentesis Amniocentesis Why it's offered Amniocentesis What happens Amniocentesis Results Amniocentesis Risks   Amniocentesis is a test you may be offered during pregnancy to check if your baby has a genetic disorder, such as Down's syndrome. It involves removing and testing a small sample of cells from amniotic fluid, which surrounds the foetus in the womb (uterus). When amniocentesis is offered Amniocentesis isn't routinely offered to all pregnant women. It's only offered if there's a high risk your baby could have a genetic condition. This could be because: an earlier antenatal screening test has suggested there may be a problem, such as Down's syndrome, spina bifida or sickle cell anaemia you've had a previous pregnancy with these problems you have a family history of a genetic condition, such as cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy, and an abnormality is detected in your baby during a routine ultrasound scan It's important to remember that you don't have to have amniocentesis if it's offered. It's up to you to decide whether you want it. Your midwife or doctor will speak to you about what the test involves, and let you know what the possible benefits and risks are, to help you make a decision. Read more about why amniocentesis is offered and deciding whether to have it. How amniocentesis is performed Amniocentesis is usually carried out between the 15th and 20th weeks of pregnancy, but may be performed later than this if necessary. Although it can be performed earlier, this may increase the risk of complications of amniocentesis and is usually avoided. During the test, a long, thin needle is inserted through your abdominal wall, guided by an ultrasound image. The needle is passed into the amniotic sac that surrounds the foetus and a small sample of amniotic fluid is removed for analysis. The test itself usually takes about 10 minutes, although the whole consultation may take about 30 minutes. Amniocentesis is usually described as being uncomfortable rather than painful. Some women describe experiencing a pain similar to period pain or feeling pressure when the needle is taken out. Read more about what happens during amniocentesis. Getting your results The first results of the test should be available within three working days and this will tell you whether Down's, Edward's or Patau's syndrome has been discovered. If rarer conditions are also being tested for, it can take two to three weeks or more for the results to come back. If your test shows that your baby has a serious inherited or genetic disorder, the implications will be fully discussed with you. There's no cure for most of the conditions amniocentesis finds, so you'll need to consider your options carefully. You may choose to continue with your pregnancy, while gathering information about the condition so you're fully prepared, or you may consider having a termination (abortion). Read more about the results of amniocentesis. What are the risks of amniocentesis? Before you decide to have amniocentesis, the risks and possible complications will be discussed with you. One of the main risks associated with amniocentesis is miscarriage, which is the loss of the pregnancy in the first 23 weeks. This is estimated to occur in 1% of women who have amniocentesis. There are also some other risks, such as infection or needing to have the procedure again because it wasn't possible to accurately test the first sample that was removed. The risk of amniocentesis causing complications is higher if it's carried out before the 15th week of pregnancy, which is why the test is only carried out after this point. Read more about the possible complications of amniocentesis. What are the alternatives? An alternative to amniocentesis is a test called chorionic villus sampling (CVS). This is where a small sample of cells from the placenta (the organ that links the mother's blood supply with her unborn baby's) are removed for testing. It's usually carried out between the 11th and 14th weeks of pregnancy, although it can be performed later than this if necessary. With CVS, the risk of miscarriage is about 1-2%, which is slightly higher than the risk of miscarriage for amniocentesis. However, as the test can be carried out earlier, you'll have more time to consider the results. If you're offered tests to look for a genetic disorder in your baby, a specialist involved in carrying out the test will be able to discuss the different options with you, and help you make a decision. Page last reviewed: 21\/04\/2016 Next review due: 21\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 116 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 59  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Antenatal checks and tests Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) Down's syndrome Rhesus disease Screening tests for abnormalities in pregnancy Ultrasound scan External links Down's Syndrome Association National Childbirth Trust: pregnancy Option Grid: amniocentesis decision aid (PDF, 52KB) The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: patient information Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell Down's screening and testing Find out about screening for Down's, Edwards' and Patau's syndrome in pregnancy Find and choose services for Amniocentesis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Chorionic villus sampling","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Chorionic-Villus-sampling","content":"Chorionic villus sampling - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Chorionic villus sampling  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Chorionic-Villus-sampling Clinical trials Chorionic villus sampling Chorionic-Villus-sampling Why it's offered Chorionic-Villus-sampling What happens Chorionic-Villus-sampling Results Chorionic-Villus-sampling Risks Introduction  Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a test you may be offered during pregnancy to check if your baby has a genetic disorder, such as Down\u2019s syndrome. It involves removing and testing a small sample of cells from the placenta (the organ linking the mother\u2019s blood supply with her unborn baby\u2019s). When CVS is offered CVS isn't routinely offered to all pregnant women. It's only offered if there's a high risk your baby could have a genetic condition. This could be because: an earlier antenatal screening test has suggested there may be a problem, such as Down's syndrome, Edward's syndrome or Patau's syndrome, or sickle cell anaemia you've had a previous pregnancy with these problems you have a family history of a genetic condition, such as cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy, and an abnormality is detected in your baby during a routine ultrasound scan It's important to remember that you don't have to have CVS if it's offered. It's up to you to decide whether you want it. Your midwife or doctor will speak to you about what the test involves, and let you know what the possible benefits and risks are, to help you make a decision. Read more about why CVS is offered and deciding whether to have it. How CVS is performed CVS is usually carried out between the 11th and 14th weeks of pregnancy, although it's sometimes performed later than this if necessary. During the test, a small sample of cells will be removed from the placenta using one of two methods: transabdominal CVS \u2013 a needle is inserted through your tummy (this is the most common method used) transcervical CVS \u2013 a tube or small forceps (smooth metal instruments that look like tongs) are inserted through the cervix (the neck of the womb) The test itself takes about 10 minutes, although the whole consultation may take about 30 minutes. The CVS procedure is usually described as being uncomfortable rather than painful, although you may experience some cramps that are similar to period pains for a day or two afterwards. Read more about what happens during CVS. Getting your results The first results of the test should be available within three working days and this will tell you whether a major chromosome condition, such as Down's, Edward's or Patau's syndrome, has been discovered. If rarer conditions are also being tested for, it can take two to three weeks or more for the results to come back. If your test shows that your baby has a serious inherited or genetic disorder, the implications will be fully discussed with you. There's no cure for most of the conditions CVS finds, so you'll need to consider your options carefully. You may choose to continue with your pregnancy, while gathering information about the condition so you're fully prepared, or you may consider having a termination (abortion). Read more about the results of CVS. What are the risks of CVS? Before you decide to have CVS, the risks and possible complications will be discussed with you. One of the main risks associated with CVS is miscarriage, which is the loss of the pregnancy in the first 23 weeks. This is estimated to occur in 1-2% of women who have CVS. There are also some other risks, such as infection or needing to have the procedure again because it wasn't possible to accurately test the first sample that was removed. The risk of CVS causing complications is higher if it's carried out before the 10th week of pregnancy, which is why the test is only carried out after this point. Read more about the risks of CVS. What are the alternatives? An alternative to CVS is a test called amniocentesis. This is where a small sample of amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds the baby in the womb) is removed for testing. It's usually carried out between the 15th and 18th week of pregnancy, although it can be performed later than this if necessary. This test may have a slightly smaller risk of causing a miscarriage, but your pregnancy will be at a more advanced stage before you can get the results, so you'll have a bit less time to consider your options. If you're offered tests to look for a genetic disorder in your baby, a specialist involved in carrying out the test will be able to discuss the different options with you, and help you make a decision. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 06\/08\/2015 Next review due: 06\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 114 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 44  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Your browser appears to have Javascript disabled, to view the pregnancy information in an accessible format please go to \/Tools\/Documents\/pregnancy_a_visual_guide.html Useful links NHS Choices links Amniocentesis Antenatal care Genetics Screening tests in pregnancy External links Antenatal Results and Choices NCT: antenatal screening NHS Screening Programme: chorionic villus sampling (PDF, 344kb) Antenatal checks and tests Find out about the checks, tests and screening you'll be offered in pregnancy, including blood and urine tests Screening in pregnancy Screening for abnormalities in pregnancy, including inherited disorders such as sickle cell NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Exercise in pregnancy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/pregnancy-exercise.aspx","content":"Exercise in pregnancy - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Exercise in pregnancy Video Player Search Enter a search term: Add question The more active and fit you are during pregnancy, the easier it will be for you to adapt to your changing shape and weight gain. It will also help you to cope with labour and get back into shape after the birth. Keep up your normal daily physical activity or exercise (sport, running, yoga, dancing, or even walking to the shops and back) for as long as you feel comfortable. Exercise is not dangerous for your baby \u2013 there is some evidence that active women are less likely to experience problems in later pregnancy and labour. You can read the whole article, or use the links to go directly to the topics: Exercise tips Exercises to avoid Exercises for a fitter pregnancy (stomach-strengthening exercises, pelvic tilt exercises and pelvic floor exercises) Exercise tips for pregnancy Don\u2019t exhaust yourself. You may need to slow down as your pregnancy progresses or if your maternity team advises you to. If in doubt, consult your maternity team. As a general rule, you should be able to hold a conversation as you exercise when pregnant. If you become breathless as you talk, then you're probably exercising too strenuously. If you weren't active before you got pregnant, don\u2019t suddenly take up strenuous exercise. If you start an aerobic exercise programme (such as running, swimming, cycling, walking or aerobics classes), tell the instructor that you're pregnant and begin with no more than 15 minutes of continuous exercise, three times a week. Increase this gradually to at least four 30-minute sessions a week. Remember that exercise doesn't have to be strenuous to be beneficial. Exercise tips when you're pregnant: always warm up before exercising, and cool down afterwards try to keep active on a daily basis: half an hour of walking each day can be enough, but if you can't manage that, any amount is better than nothing avoid any strenuous exercise in hot weather drink plenty of water and other fluids if you go to exercise classes, make sure your teacher is properly qualified, and knows that you\u2019re pregnant as well as how many weeks pregnant you are you might like to try swimming because the water will support your increased weight. Some local swimming pools provide aquanatal classes with qualified instructors. Find your local sport and fitness services exercises that have a risk of falling, such as horse riding, downhill skiing, ice hockey, gymnastics and cycling, should only be done with caution. Falls may risk damage to the baby Exercises to avoid in pregnancy don't lie flat on your back, particularly after 16 weeks, because the weight of your bump presses on the main blood vessel bringing blood back to your heart and this can make you feel faint don't take part in contact sports where there's a risk of being hit, such as kickboxing, judo or squash don't go scuba diving, because the baby has no protection against decompression sickness and gas embolism (gas bubbles in the bloodstream) don't exercise at heights over 2,500m above sea level until you have acclimatised: this is because you and your baby are at risk of altitude sickness Exercises for a fitter pregnancy If you are pregnant, try to fit the exercises listed below into your daily routine. They will strengthen your muscles so that you can carry the extra weight of pregnancy. They'll also make your joints stronger, improve circulation, ease backache, and generally help you feel well. Stomach-strengthening exercises As your baby gets bigger, you may find that the hollow in your lower back increases and this can give you backache. These exercises strengthen stomach (abdominal) muscles and may ease backache, which can be a problem in pregnancy: start in a box position (on all fours) with knees under hips, hands under shoulders, with fingers facing forward and abdominals lifted to keep your back straight pull in your stomach muscles and raise your back up towards the ceiling, curling the trunk and allowing your head to relax gently forward. Don't let your elbows lock hold for a few seconds then slowly return to the box position take care not to hollow your back: it should always return to a straight\/neutral position do this slowly and rhythmically 10 times, making your muscles work hard and moving your back carefully only move your back as far as you can comfortably Pelvic tilt exercises stand with your shoulders and bottom against a wall keep your knees soft pull your tummy button towards your spine, so that your back flattens against the wall: hold for four seconds and release repeat up to 10 times Pelvic floor exercises Pelvic floor exercises help to strengthen the muscles of the pelvic floor, which come under great strain in pregnancy and childbirth. The pelvic floor consists of layers of muscles that stretch like a supportive hammock from the pubic bone (in front) to the end of the backbone. If your pelvic floor muscles are weak, you may find that you leak urine when you cough, sneeze or strain. This is quite common and you needn\u2019t feel embarrassed. It's known as stress incontinence and it can continue after pregnancy. By performing pelvic floor exercises, you can strengthen the muscles. This helps to reduce or avoid stress incontinence after pregnancy. All pregnant women should do pelvic floor exercises, even if you're young and not suffering from stress incontinence now.  How to do pelvic floor exercises: close up your anus as if you're trying to prevent a bowel movement at the same time, draw in your vagina as if you're gripping a tampon, and your urethra as if to stop the flow of urine at first, do this exercise quickly, tightening and releasing the muscles immediately then do it slowly, holding the contractions for as long as you can before you relax: try to count to 10 try to do three sets of eight squeezes every day: to help you remember, you could do a set at each meal As well as these exercises, practise tightening up the pelvic floor muscles before and during coughing and sneezing. Find out about preventing, living with, and treating incontinence. Find out more about keeping fit and healthy after you've had your baby.   Need activity ideas for the rest of the family? Get activity ideas from Start4Life to help get your family more active. Please bear in mind that the activity plans are not designed for use during pregnancy, but can be useful for your partner, children and other family members. Page last reviewed: 09\/02\/2015 Next review due: 09\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 209 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 119  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Related articles Foods to avoid Alcohol, medicines and drugs Stay healthy at work External links Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Recreational exercise and pregnancy (PDF, 543kb) Tommy's: guide to exercise in pregnancy Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: pelvic floor muscles (PDF, 141kb) Swimming for fitness Get started in swimming with this beginners' guide to making swimming fun and safe A guide to yoga How to get started with yoga, including the health benefits, yoga styles for beginners, and finding a class Overweight and pregnant Being very overweight can cause problems in pregnancy. Find out the risks and what you can do Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Community content from HealthUnlocked Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Dentist GP Hospital Maternity service Information and support for mental health Parenting information and support services Sexual health information and support Sports and Fitness Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Find parenting and childcare services","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/ServiceDirectories\/Pages\/ServiceSearchAdditional.aspx?ServiceType=ParentingAndChildcare","content":"Find Parenting information and support services - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care Your rights to care and support Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Start new search Find Parenting information and support services Nearly there. Enter a location below to continue or browse all locations. You can also narrow your search. Find services Location Locate me Narrow your search By distance Within 5 miles Within 10 miles Within 25 miles Within 50 miles NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales Health Careers NHS Jobs Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library NHS Choices Training Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Gestational diabetes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/gestational-diabetes","content":"Gestational diabetes - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Gestational diabetes  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Gestational diabetes gestational-diabetes Treatment   Gestational diabetes is high blood sugar that develops during pregnancy and usually disappears after giving birth. It can occur at any stage of pregnancy, but is more common in the second half. It occurs if your body cannot produce enough insulin \u2013 a hormone that helps control blood sugar levels \u2013 to meet the extra needs in pregnancy. Gestational diabetes can cause problems for you and your baby during and after birth. But the risk of these problems happening can be reduced if it's detected and well managed. This page covers: Who's at risk Symptoms How it can affect your pregnancy Screening Treatments Long-term effects Future pregnancies Who's at risk of gestational diabetes Any woman can develop gestational diabetes during pregnancy, but you're at an increased risk if: your body mass index (BMI) is above 30 \u2013 use the healthy weight calculator to work out your BMI you previously had a baby who weighed 4.5kg (10lbs) or more at birth you had gestational diabetes in a previous pregnancy one of your parents or siblings has diabetes your family origins are south Asian, Chinese, African-Caribbean or Middle Eastern If any of these apply to you, you should be offered screening for gestational diabetes during your pregnancy. Symptoms of gestational diabetes Gestational diabetes doesn't usually cause any symptoms. Most cases are only picked up when your blood sugar level is tested during screening for gestational diabetes. Some women may develop symptoms if their blood sugar level gets too high (hyperglycaemia), such as: increased thirst needing to pee more often than usual a dry mouth tiredness But some of these symptoms are common during pregnancy anyway and aren't necessarily a sign of a problem. Speak to your midwife or doctor if you're worried about any symptoms you're experiencing. How gestational diabetes can affect your pregnancy Most women with gestational diabetes have otherwise normal pregnancies with healthy babies. However, gestational diabetes can cause problems such as: your baby growing larger than usual \u2013 this may lead to difficulties during the delivery and increases the likelihood of needing induced labour or a caesarean section polyhydramnios \u2013 too much amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds the baby) in the womb, which can cause premature labour or problems at delivery premature birth \u2013 giving birth before the 37th week of pregnancy pre-eclampsia \u2013 a condition that causes high blood pressure during pregnancy and can lead to pregnancy complications if not treated your baby developing low blood sugar or yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice) after he or she is born, which may require treatment in hospital the loss of your baby (stillbirth) \u2013 though this is rare Having gestational diabetes also means you're at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the future. Screening for gestational diabetes During your first antenatal appointment at around weeks 8 to 12 of your pregnancy, your midwife or doctor will ask you some questions to determine whether you're at an increased risk of gestational diabetes. If you have one or more risk factors for gestational diabetes \u2013 see Who's at risk, above \u2013 you should be offered a screening test. The screening test used is called an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), which takes about two hours. It involves having a blood test taken in the morning when you've had nothing to eat or drink (except water) overnight. You're then given a glucose drink.  After resting for two hours, another blood sample is taken to see how your body is dealing with the glucose. The OGTT is done when you're between 24 and 28 weeks pregnant. If you've had gestational diabetes before, you'll be offered an OGTT earlier in pregnancy soon after your booking visit, and another OGTT at 24 to 28 weeks if the first test is normal. Alternatively, it may be suggested that you start testing your blood sugar yourself using a finger-pricking device in the same way as you did during your previous episode of gestational diabetes. Treatments for gestational diabetes In women with gestational diabetes, the chances of having problems with the pregnancy can be reduced by controlling blood sugar levels. You'll be given a blood sugar testing kit so you can monitor the effects of treatment. Blood sugar levels can be reduced by changes in diet and exercise.  But the majority of women will need medication as well if changes in diet and exercise don't reduce blood sugar enough. This may be tablets or insulin injections. You'll also be more closely monitored during your pregnancy and birth to check for any potential problems. If you have gestational diabetes, it's best to give birth before 41 weeks. Induction of labour or a caesarean section may be recommended if labour doesn't start naturally by this time. Earlier delivery may be recommended if there are concerns about your or your baby's health or if your blood sugar levels haven't been well controlled. Read more about how gestational diabetes is treated. Long-term effects of gestational diabetes Gestational diabetes normally goes away after birth. But women who've had it are more likely to develop: gestational diabetes again in future pregnancies type 2 diabetes \u2013 a lifelong type of diabetes You should have a blood test to check for diabetes 6 to 13 weeks after giving birth, and every year thereafter if the result is normal. See your GP if you develop symptoms of high blood sugar, such as increased thirst, needing to pee more often than usual, and a dry mouth \u2013 don't wait until your next test.  You should have the tests even if you feel well, as many people with diabetes don't have any symptoms.  You'll also be advised about things you can do to reduce your risk of developing diabetes, such as maintaining a healthy weight, eating a balanced diet and exercising regularly. Some research has suggested that babies of mothers who had gestational diabetes may be more likely to develop diabetes or become obese later in life. Planning future pregnancies If you've had gestational diabetes before and you're planning to get pregnant, make sure you get checked for diabetes. Your GP can arrange this. If you do have diabetes, you should be referred to a diabetes pre-conception clinic for support to ensure your condition is well controlled before you get pregnant. Read more about diabetes in pregnancy. If you have an unplanned but wanted pregnancy, talk to your GP and tell them you had gestational diabetes in your previous pregnancy.   If tests show you don't have diabetes, you'll be offered screening earlier in pregnancy soon after your booking visit, and a repeat screening test at 24 to 28 weeks if the first test is normal. Alternatively, it may be suggested that you start testing your blood glucose yourself using a finger-pricking device in the same way as you did during your previous gestational diabetes. Page last reviewed: 05\/08\/2016 Next review due: 05\/08\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 170 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 27  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 48  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Gestational diabetes Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Cathy Moulton, a Diabetes UK care adviser, explains how gestational diabetes affects pregnant women. Kimberley, who was diagnosed with gestational diabetes, talks about the symptoms she experienced and how she dealt with the condition. Media last reviewed: 03\/03\/2016 Next review due: 03\/03\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Diabetes and pregnancy High blood sugar Low blood sugar Type 2 diabetes External links Diabetes.co.uk: gestational diabetes Diabetes UK: gestational diabetes National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): diabetes in pregnancy Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: gestational diabetes (PDF, 140kb) Diabetes and pregnancy How type 1 and type 2 diabetes can affect you and your baby, plus gestational (pregnancy) diabetes Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Healthy diet in pregnancy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/healthy-pregnancy-diet.aspx","content":"Healthy diet in pregnancy - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Have a healthy diet in pregnancy A healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle at any time, but is especially vital if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy. Eating healthily during pregnancy will help your baby to develop and grow. You can read through this article, or go directly to the sections you want by clicking these links: Fruit and vegetables Starchy foods (carbohydrates) Protein Dairy Foods that are high in sugar or fat Healthy snacks Preparing food safely Healthy Start vouchers You don't need to go on a special diet, but it's important to eat a variety of different foods every day to get the right balance of nutrients that you and your baby need.  It's best to get vitamins and minerals from the foods you eat, but when you're pregnant you need to take some supplements as well, to make sure you get everything you need. Read more about vitamins and supplements in pregnancy.  There are also certain foods that should be avoided in pregnancy. You will probably find that you are hungrier than usual, but you don't need to \"eat for two\" \u2013 even if you are expecting twins or triplets. Have a healthy breakfast every day, because this can help you to avoid snacking on foods that are high in fat and sugar. Eating healthily often means just changing the amounts of different foods you eat so that your diet is varied, rather than cutting out all your favourites. You can use the Eatwell Guide to get the balance of your diet right. The eatwell plate shows you how much to eat from each food group. You will need to be careful with your diet if you develop gestational diabetes \u2013 your doctor or midwife will advise you. Fruit and vegetables in pregnancy Eat plenty of fruit and vegetables because these provide vitamins and minerals, as well as fibre, which helps digestion and can help prevent constipation. Eat at least five portions of a variety of fruit and vegetables every day \u2013 these can be fresh, frozen, canned, dried or juiced. Always wash fresh fruit and vegetables carefully. Find out what counts as a portion of fruit or vegetables. Starchy foods (carbohydrates) in pregnancy Starchy foods are an important source of energy, vitamins and fibre, and are satisfying without containing too many calories. They include bread, potatoes, breakfast cereals, rice, pasta, noodles, maize, millet, oats, sweet potatoes, yams and cornmeal. These foods should make up just over a third of the food you eat. Choose wholegrain instead of processed (white) varieties, or potatoes with their skins on, when you can as they contain more fibre. Protein in pregnancy Eat some protein foods every day. Sources of protein include: beans  pulses  fish  eggs meat (but avoid liver)  poultry  nuts Choose lean meat, remove the skin from poultry, and try not to add extra fat or oil when cooking meat. Read more about eating meat in a healthy way. Make sure eggs, poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat such as lamb, beef and pork are cooked all the way through. Check that there is no pink meat, and that juices have no pink or red in them. Try to eat two portions of fish a week, one of which should be oily fish such as salmon, sardines or mackerel. Find out about the health benefits of fish and shellfish. There are some types of fish you should avoid in pregnancy. For more information, see Foods to avoid in pregnancy.  Dairy in pregnancy Dairy foods such as milk, cheese, fromage frais and yoghurt are important in pregnancy, because they contain calcium and other nutrients that your baby needs. Choose low-fat varieties wherever possible, such as semi-skimmed or skimmed milk, low-fat lower-sugar yoghurt and reduced-fat hard cheese. Aim for two to three portions a day. If you prefer dairy alternatives, such as soya drinks and yoghurts, go for unsweetened, calcium-fortified versions. For more information, read about the nutritional benefits of milk and dairy foods. There are some cheeses you should avoid in pregnancy. To find out which ones, see Foods to avoid in pregnancy. Foods that are high in fat, sugar or both These include: all spreading fats (such as butter) oils salad dressings cream chocolate crisps biscuits pastries ice cream cake puddings fizzy drinks If you're having foods and drinks that are high in fat and sugar, have these less often and in small amounts.  Sugary foods and drinks are often high in calories which can contribute to weight gain. Having sugary foods and drinks can also lead to tooth decay.  Fat is very high in calories, so eating too many fatty foods or eating them too often can make you put on weight. Having too much saturated fat can increase the amount of cholesterol in the blood, which increases the chance of developing heart disease. Try to cut down on saturated fat, and have small amounts of foods rich in unsaturated fat instead. Find out about saturated and unsaturated fat. Healthy snacks in pregnancy If you get hungry between meals, try not to eat snacks that are high in fat and\/or sugar, such as sweets, biscuits, crisps or chocolate. Instead, choose something healthier, such as: sandwiches or pitta bread filled with grated cheese, lean ham, mashed tuna, salmon, or sardines, with salad salad vegetables, such as carrot, celery or cucumber low-fat lower-sugar plain yoghurt or fromage frais with fruit hummus with wholemeal pitta bread or vegetable sticks ready-to-eat apricots, figs or prunes vegetable and bean soups unsweetened breakfast cereals, or porridge, with milk milky drinks fresh fruit baked beans on toast or a baked potato Here are some more ideas for healthy food swaps. Preparing food safely Wash fruit, vegetables and salads to remove all traces of soil, which may contain toxoplasma, a parasite that can cause toxoplasmosis \u2013 which can harm your unborn baby. Wash all surfaces and utensils, and your hands, after preparing raw meat \u2013 this will help to avoid toxoplasmosis.   Make sure that raw foods are stored separately from ready-to-eat foods, otherwise there's a risk of contamination. This is to avoid other types of food poisoning from meat (such as salmonella, campylobacter and E.coli). Use a separate chopping board for raw meats. Heat ready meals until they're steaming hot all the way through \u2013 this is especially important for meals containing poultry. You also need to make sure that some foods, such as eggs, poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat like lamb, beef and pork are cooked very thoroughly. For tips, read Foods to avoid in pregnancy. Healthy Start vouchers for pregnant women The Healthy Start scheme provides vouchers to pregnant women and families who qualify. The vouchers can be used to buy milk and plain fresh and frozen vegetables at local shops. You'll also get coupons that can be exchanged for free vitamins locally. You qualify for Healthy Start if you're at least 10 weeks pregnant or have a child under four years old, and you or your family get: Income Support Income-based Jobseeker's Allowance Income-related Employment and Support Allowance Child Tax Credit (but not Working Tax Credit, unless your family is receiving Working Tax Credit run-on only*) and has an annual family income of £16,190 or less (2014\/15) If you are pregnant and under 18 years old, you qualify for Healthy Start vouchers regardless of your income. *Working Tax Credit run-on is the Working Tax Credit you receive in the four weeks immediately after you have stopped working for 16 hours per week (single adults) or 24 hours per week (couples). You can download a Healthy Start application form from Healthy Start, or call the Healthy Start helpline on 0345 607 6823 to order a copy.  If you are claiming Universal Credit and are pregnant or have a child under four years old, call the Healthy Start helpline for information about any discretionary support that may be available. You can also find out where to get Healthy Start vitamins near you. Page last reviewed: 27\/01\/2015 Next review due: 27\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 362 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 71  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 19  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Related articles Foods to avoid  Exercises and keeping active  Alcohol, medicines and other drugs  Infections that may affect your baby  5 A DAY External links Healthy Start Overweight and pregnant Being very overweight can cause problems in pregnancy. Find out the risks and what you can do Vegetarian and vegan mums-to-be Healthy eating advice for vegetarians and vegans during pregnancy Food safety How to prevent food poisoning at home, including E. coli, with advice on food safety and keeping germs in check Healthy eating out Make healthier choices when you eat out at restaurants and cafes or grab lunch on the go The Eatwell Guide If you want to get the balance of your diet right, use the Eatwell Guide. It shows you how much you should eat from each food group Pregnancy planning toolkit Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date Services near you Get help with all aspects of your pregnancy from the NHS in your area Find and compare services Services Dentist Eating disorders GP Hospital Maternity service Information and support for mental health Parenting information and support services Sexual health information and support Urgent Care Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Hyperemesis gravidarum","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/severe-vomiting-in-pregnancy-hyperemesis-gravidarum.aspx","content":"Severe vomiting in pregnancy Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Severe vomiting in pregnancy Sickness in pregnancy is common. Around 7 out of every 10 pregnant women experience nausea and\/or vomiting, and this doesn't just occur in the morning. For most women, this improves or disappears completely by around week 14, although for some women it can last longer. Some pregnant women experience excessive nausea and vomiting. They might be sick many times a day and be unable to keep food or drink down, which can have a negative effect on their daily life. This excessive nausea and vomiting is known as hyperemesis gravidarum (HG), and often needs hospital treatment. Exactly how many pregnant women get HG is not known, as some cases may go unreported, but it's thought to be around 1 in every 100. If you are being sick frequently and can't keep food down, tell your midwife or doctor, or contact the hospital as soon as possible. There is a risk you may become dehydrated, and your midwife or doctor can make sure you get the right treatment. Symptoms of hyperemesis gravidarum HG is much worse than the normal nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (\"morning sickness\"). Signs and symptoms of HG include: prolonged and severe nausea and vomiting \u2013 some women report being sick up to 50 times a day dehydration \u2013 not having enough fluids in your body because you can't keep drinks down; if you're drinking less than 500ml a day, you need to seek help ketosis \u2013 a serious condition that results in the build-up of acidic chemicals in the blood and urine; ketones are produced when your body breaks down fat, rather than glucose, for energy weight loss low blood pressure (hypotension) when standing Unlike regular pregnancy sickness, HG may not get better by 14 weeks. It may not clear up completely until the baby is born, although some symptoms may improve at around 20 weeks. See your GP or midwife if you have severe nausea and vomiting, ideally before you start suffering from dehydration and weight loss. There are other conditions that can cause nausea and vomiting, such as appendicitis, and your doctor will need to rule these out first. healthtalk.org has videos and written interviews of women talking about their experiences of hyperemesis gravidarum, and how they coped. What causes hyperemesis gravidarum? It's not known what causes HG, or why some women get it and others don't. Some experts believe that it is linked to the changing hormones in your body that occur during pregnancy. There is some evidence that it runs in families, so if you have a mother or sister who has had HG in a pregnancy, you may be more likely to get it yourself. If you have had HG in a previous pregnancy, you are more likely to get it in your next pregnancy than women who have never had it before, so it's worth planning in advance. Treating hyperemesis gravidarum There are medications that can be used in pregnancy, including the first 12 weeks, to help improve the symptoms of HG. These include anti-sickness (anti-emetic) drugs, vitamins (B6 and B12) and steroids, or combinations of these. Evidence suggests that the earlier you start treatment, the more effective it will be. You may need to try different types of medication until you find what works best for you. If your nausea and vomiting cannot be controlled, you may need to be admitted to hospital. This is so that doctors can assess your condition and give you the right treatment, to protect the health of you and your baby. Treatment can include intravenous fluids, which are given directly into a vein through a drip. If you have severe vomiting, the anti-sickness drugs may also need to be given via a vein or a muscle. The charity Pregnancy Sickness Support has information and tips on coping with nausea and vomiting, including HG. Will hyperemesis gravidarum harm my baby? HG is unpleasant with dramatic symptoms, but the good news is that it's unlikely to harm your baby, if treated effectively. However, if it causes you to lose weight during pregnancy, there is an increased risk that your baby may be born smaller than expected (have a low birthweight). This is why it's important to be monitored for dehydration. Other symptoms you may experience Pregnancy Sickness Support is in touch with many women who have had HG, and who report having some or all of the following symptoms in addition to the main symptoms listed above:  extremely heightened sense of smell excessive saliva production, known as ptyalism headaches and constipation from dehydration pressure sores from long periods of time in bed episodes of urinary incontinence, due to vomiting combined with pregnancy hormone relaxin If you experience these symptoms, you are not alone. Many women have them and, although they can be distressing, they will go away when the HG stops or the baby is born. How you might feel The nausea and vomiting of HG can have a huge impact on your life, at a time when you were expecting to be enjoying pregnancy and looking forward to the birth of your baby. It can affect you both emotionally and physically. The symptoms not only make your life a misery, but may lead to further health complications, such as depression or tears in your oesophagus. Severe sickness can be exhausting and stop you from doing everyday tasks, such as going to work or even getting out of bed. In addition to feeling very unwell and tired, you might also feel: anxious about going out or being too far from home, in case you need to vomit isolated, because you don't know anyone who understands what it's like to have HG confused as to why this is happening to you unsure whether you can cope with the rest of the pregnancy if you continue to feel very ill If you feel any of these, don't keep it to yourself. Talk to your midwife or doctor, and explain the impact HG is having on your life and how it is making you feel. You could also talk to your partner, family and friends, if you want to. If you want to talk to someone who has been through HG, you can contact Pregnancy Sickness Support. They have a support network across the UK, and can put you in touch with someone who has had HG. Bear in mind that HG is much worse than regular pregnancy sickness \u2013 it is not the result of anything you have or haven't done, and you do need treatment and support. Another pregnancy If you have had HG before, it's likely that you will get it again in another pregnancy. If you decide on another pregnancy, it can help to plan ahead, such as arranging child care so that you can get plenty of rest. Think back to what helped you last time \u2013 for example, specific drinks \u2013 and make sure you implement these measures this time around. Talk to your doctor about starting medication early.   Blood clots and hyperemesis gravidarum Because HG can cause dehydration, there's also an increased risk of having deep vein thrombosis (a blood clot), although this is rare.  If you are dehydrated and immobile, there is treatment that you can be given to prevent blood clots. Read more about how to prevent deep vein thrombosis. Page last reviewed: 16\/09\/2014 Next review due: 16\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 97 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Tiredness in pregnancy  Healthy eating in pregnancy Pregnant at work  External links Pregnancy Sickness Support 'I vomited 30 times a day in pregnancy' Caitlin Dean tells how she coped with hyperemesis gravidarum Morning sickness How to deal with nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, and when to seek medical help Your antenatal care When you become pregnant, you'll need to contact the NHS so you can start your antenatal care. Find out what to expect Pregnancy planning tools Choosing where to have your baby Find out about antenatal care If you have a chronic condition Start a birth plan Stay organised with a to-do list Work out your due date NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Miscarriage","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Miscarriage","content":"Miscarriage - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Miscarriage  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Miscarriage Clinical trials Miscarriage Miscarriage Symptoms Miscarriage Causes Miscarriage Diagnosis Miscarriage What happens Miscarriage Afterwards Miscarriage Prevention Introduction  A miscarriage is the loss of a pregnancy during the first 23 weeks. The main sign of a miscarriage is vaginal bleeding, which may be followed by cramping and pain in your lower abdomen. If you have vaginal bleeding, contact your GP or midwife. Most GPs can refer you to an early pregnancy unit at your local hospital straight away if necessary. You may be referred to a maternity ward if your pregnancy is at a later stage. However, bear in mind that light vaginal bleeding is relatively common during the first trimester of pregnancy (the first 12 weeks) and doesn't necessarily mean you're having a miscarriage. Read more about the symptoms of miscarriage. What causes a miscarriage? There are probably many reasons why a miscarriage may happen, although the cause isn't usually identified. The majority aren't caused by anything the mother has done. It's thought most miscarriages are caused by abnormal chromosomes in the baby. Chromosomes are genetic \"building blocks\" that guide the development of a baby. If a baby has too many or not enough chromosomes, it won't develop properly. If a miscarriage happens during the second trimester of pregnancy (between weeks 14 and 26), it's sometimes the result of an underlying health condition in the mother. For most women, a miscarriage is a one-off event and they go on to have a successful pregnancy in the future. Read more about what causes a miscarriage. Can miscarriages be prevented? The majority of miscarriages can't be prevented. If a woman has suffered from more than three miscarriages, some women can be helped to keep their pregnancy with medication under the care of a specialist. However, there are some things you can do to reduce the risk of a miscarriage. Avoid smoking, drinking alcohol and using drugs while pregnant. Being a healthy weight before getting pregnant, eating a healthy diet and reducing your risk of infection can also help. Read more about preventing miscarriages. What happens if you think you're having a miscarriage? If you have the symptoms of a miscarriage, you'll usually be referred to a hospital for tests. In most cases, an ultrasound scan can determine whether the pregnancy is ongoing or you're having a miscarriage. When a miscarriage is confirmed, you'll need to talk to your doctor or nurse about the options for the management of the end of the pregnancy. In the majority of cases, the pregnancy tissue will pass out naturally in a week or two. Sometimes medication to assist the passage of the tissue may be recommended, or you can choose to have minor surgery to remove it if you don't want to wait. Read more about diagnosing a miscarriage and what happens if you have a miscarriage. After a miscarriage A miscarriage can be an emotionally and physically draining experience. You may have feelings of guilt, shock and anger. Advice and support is available at this time from hospital counselling services and charity groups. You may also find it beneficial to have a memorial for your lost baby. You can try for another baby as soon as your symptoms have settled and you've had one period, although you should ensure you're emotionally and physically ready first. Having a miscarriage doesn't necessarily mean you'll have another if you get pregnant again. Most women are able to have a healthy pregnancy after a miscarriage, even in cases of recurrent miscarriages. Read more about what happens after a miscarriage. How common are miscarriages? Miscarriages are much more common than most people realise. Among women who know they're pregnant, it's estimated one in six of these pregnancies will end in miscarriage. Many more miscarriages occur before a woman is even aware she has become pregnant. Losing three or more pregnancies in a row (recurrent miscarriages) is uncommon and only affects around 1 in 100 women. Miscarriage Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. It is believed that one in five pregnancies ends in miscarriage. An expert explains what a miscarriage is, as well as possible causes and the effect it has on parents. Mark and Lara describe how they dealt with the miscarriage of their first baby. Media last reviewed: 03\/05\/2016 Next review due: 03\/05\/2018 Page last reviewed: 21\/05\/2015 Next review due: 21\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 205 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antiphospholipid syndrome Bereavement Ectopic pregnancy Pregnancy and baby guide External links The Ectopic Pregnancy Trust FPA Lab Tests Online UK: prolactin The Miscarriage Association National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage Samaritans Pregnancy and baby All you need to know about pregnancy, birth and looking after a baby, including feeding and trying to get pregnant Bleeding in pregnancy Possible causes of vaginal bleeding in pregnancy, and what to do if it happens Find and choose services for Miscarriage Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Polyhydramnios (too much amniotic fluid)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/polyhydramnios","content":"Polyhydramnios - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Polyhydramnios (too much amniotic fluid)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview polyhydramnios Polyhydramnios Introduction  Polyhydramnios is a common complication of pregnancy, where there's an excessive amount of amniotic fluid surrounding the unborn baby (foetus). An abnormal amount of fluid (whether increased or reduced) might be suspected by your healthcare professional after 30 weeks of pregnancy, during one of your antenatal appointments, and should be monitored and investigated. The cause of polyhydramnios is often unknown, but sometimes indicates a problem with the baby's development (see What are the causes?, below). However, most women with polyhydramnios give birth to healthy babies. If you're pregnant and notice your belly is getting large very quickly (acute polyhydramnios), contact your doctor or midwife. It's rare for it to happen suddenly, but it can indicate an abnormality with the foetus and increases your risk of giving birth prematurely. This page covers: How is polyhydramnios diagnosed?  What are the causes?  What associated risks should I be aware of?  How is it investigated and managed?  How is polyhydramnios diagnosed?  In most women with polyhydramnios, the excess fluid builds up slowly. After 30 weeks of pregnancy, this excess fluid should be noticeable and picked up by your GP, midwife or obstetrician during one of your antenatal appointments. In rare cases, when polyhydramnios develops very quickly, the excess fluid may be apparent earlier in pregnancy, or might be noted at the time of the detailed scan at 18-22 weeks. If increased amniotic fluid is suspected, you may be referred for an ultrasound scan, so that the depth of the amniotic fluid surrounding the foetus can be measured. What are the causes?  Often, no cause can be found for polyhydramnios. However, it can be associated with any of the following: The mother carrying twins (read about giving birth to twins).  The mother having diabetes, including gestational diabetes (pregnancy-related diabetes). Sometimes, if diabetes is the cause, the baby will be larger than expected for its stage of development. A blockage in part of the baby's gut (a condition called gut atresia), which prevents them absorbing the usual amount of amniotic fluid. A gut atresia would often require an operation after the baby's birth (read more about gut atresia in babies). The mother having rhesus disease, where antibodies in the mother's blood cross the placenta, sometimes causing anaemia in the foetus.   A growth of blood vessels on the placenta, called a chorioangioma. A build-up of fluid in specific areas of the baby's body, such as the abdomen and chest cavity, called hydrops fetalis. A genetic problem with the foetus. What associated risks should I be aware of?  Having polyhydramnios means there's a slightly higher risk of your unborn baby having a birth defect, especially if the fluid build-up is severe. You should discuss with your healthcare professionals any other problems that the extra fluid could be linked to. However, don't panic \u2013 the vast majority of women with polyhydramnios give birth to healthy babies. Your labour may be affected in the following ways: You may go into premature labour because of the additional pressure stretching the womb. Your baby may be in the wrong position and you may need a caesarean section. If your baby is in the wrong position, the umbilical cord may slip down into the birth canal when the membranes rupture (read more about a prolapsed umbilical cord). You may have an increased risk of bleeding after delivery. How is it investigated and managed?  Most women with polyhydramnios need an ultrasound investigation and a glucose tolerance test, to try to identify a cause and check for gestational diabetes.  If your condition isn't severe, this can be done in the GP's surgery and you may not need to be admitted to hospital. Read more about ultrasound scans in pregnancy. If the ultrasound scan appears to show a problem with the foetus, doctors might discuss whether you want to have amniocentesis (where a sample of fluid is drawn out using a needle), to test for chromosomal or genetic problems in the foetus.  Your doctor may also recommend a period of bed rest to help reduce your risk of giving birth prematurely, if you're at risk. During and after labour Your doctors and midwives will usually recommend giving birth to the baby in hospital, where more emergency treatment options are available. They may also recommend close monitoring of the baby's heart rate in labour. If your baby appears normal after birth, your doctor might suggest passing a tube down your baby's throat to check them for internal problems, such as a problem with the development of their gullet (oesophageal atresia). Read general information about your baby after the birth. Amniotic fluid: what does it do?  During pregnancy, the unborn baby (foetus) floats inside a fluid-filled sac in the womb. Amniotic fluid has several important roles: it protects the foetus from outside injury by cushioning sudden blows and movements it helps the foetus to move in the womb, allowing for proper bone growth it helps the foetus' lungs develop properly it keeps the temperature relatively constant around the foetus The fluid constantly moves around as the foetus swallows it and releases it through urine.   Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/03\/2015 Next review due: 19\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 93 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 69  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Pregnancy and baby guide Caesarean section External links National Childbirth Trust Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Get weekly pregnancy and baby emails, linking to articles and over 100 videos of experts, mums and dads Gestational diabetes Find out about gestational diabetes, a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy and normally disappears after giving birth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pregnancy due date calculator","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pregnancy-and-baby\/pages\/due-date-calculator.aspx","content":"Pregnancy due date calculator - Pregnancy and baby guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pregnancy and baby Getting pregnant Secrets to success Healthy diet Planning: things to think about Foods to avoid Alcohol Keep to a healthy weight Vitamins and supplements Exercise Am I pregnant? When you can get pregnant Signs and symptoms When you can take a test Finding out Problems Help if you're not getting pregnant Fertility tests Fertility treatments Work out your due date If you have a chronic health condition When pregnancy goes wrong Sign up for weekly pregnancy emails Pregnancy I'm pregnant! Signs and symptoms of pregnancy Due date calculator The early days Week by week 4-8 weeks 9-12 weeks 13-16 weeks 17-20 weeks 21-24 weeks 25-28 weeks 29-32 weeks 33-36 weeks 37-40 weeks 40 weeks plus Pregnancy week by week Twins Antenatal care with twins Pregnant with twins Healthy multiple pregnancy Getting ready for twins Real story: premature twins Real story: losing a twin Preparing for the birth Where to give birth: your options Antenatal classes Make and save your birth plan Pack your bag for birth Tests, scans and checks Due date calculator Your antenatal care Your antenatal appointments Who's who in the antenatal team Ultrasound scans Routine checks and tests Screening for Down's syndrome Checks for abnormalities Baby positions in the womb Vaccinations The flu jab Whooping cough Your health and wellbeing Healthy eating Foods to avoid Drinking alcohol while pregnant Exercise Vitamins and supplements Stop smoking Sex in pregnancy Pharmacy and prescription medicines Illegal drugs in pregnancy Your health at work Pregnancy infections Travel If you're a teenager Existing health problems If you have a long-term condition Overweight and pregnant Mental health problems Diabetes in pregnancy Asthma and pregnancy Epilepsy and pregnancy Common pregnancy ailments Backache Bleeding gums Headaches Heartburn Itching Morning sickness Severe vomiting Pelvic pain Piles Stretch marks Swollen ankles Tiredness and sleep Vaginal bleeding Vaginal discharge More common problems Pregnancy-induced conditions Hyperemesis gravidarum Real story: hyperemesis gravidarum Hyperemesis gravidarum: husband's story Pre-eclampsia Gestational diabetes Obstetric cholestasis Make and save your birth plan Maternity and paternity benefits Make and save your to-do list When pregnancy goes wrong Labour and birth The start of labour Signs that labour has begun When to go to the hospital or birth centre What happens when you arrive at hospital Premature labour Induction The birth What happens during labour and birth Forceps and ventouse delivery Pain relief Episiotomy What your birth partner can do Breech and transverse births Caesarean Giving birth to twins What happens straight after the baby is born You after the birth Getting to know your newborn Emotions and worries Feelings and relationships Dads and partners If you have a chronic condition When pregnancy goes wrong Premature babies Premature or ill babies Premature baby: mum's story Premature baby: dad's story Premature twins: mum's story Losing a premature twin: mum's story Make your birth plan Your newborn How to breastfeed Breastfeeding: the first few days Breastfeeding FAQs Breastfeeding positions and latch Benefits of breastfeeding Help and support Breastfeeding in public Expressing breast milk Breastfeeding a premature baby Mums' breastfeeding experiences When to stop breastfeeding Breastfeeding problems Common breastfeeding problems Breastfeeding and thrush Breastfeeding and tongue tie Is my baby getting enough milk? Help for sore nipples Breast pain while breastfeeding Lifestyle and breastfeeding Breastfeeding and diet Breastfeeding and medicines Breastfeeding and smoking Breastfeeding and alcohol Going back to work Bottle feeding Bottle feeding advice Sterilising bottles Combining breast and bottle Making up infant formula Types of infant formula Infant formula: common questions Newborn screening tests Newborn blood spot test Newborn hearing test Newborn physical examination Newborn essentials What you'll need for your baby Washing and bathing your baby Getting your baby to sleep Soothing a crying baby How to change a nappy Nappy rash First aid kit for babies Baby car seats and car safety New parents Being a new parent Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents New mums Your postnatal check Your post pregnancy body Feeling depressed Sex and contraception Sleep and tiredness Coping with stress Keeping fit and healthy Twins and multiples Your newborn twins Multiple babies and sleep Feeding multiple babies Getting out and about Multiples and postnatal depression Interactive parenting tool Baby development timeline Sign up for baby advice emails Babies and toddlers Weaning and solid foods Your baby's first solid foods Babies: foods to avoid Food allergies in children Help your baby enjoy new foods What to feed young children Baby food: common questions Fussy eaters Vegetarian and vegan children Vitamins for children Drinks and cups Food safety and hygiene Meal ideas for children Teething Teething symptoms Tips for helping a teething baby Looking after your baby's teeth Baby health and care Spotting signs of serious illness Reflux in babies How to take a baby's temperature Reducing the risk of SIDS Treating a high temperature Sleep problems in children Coughs, colds and ear infections Diarrhoea and vomiting Infectious illnesses Children's medicines Looking after a sick child Serious conditions and special needs Constipation in young children Your baby's weight and height Baby health and development reviews Leg and foot problems in children Learning, play and behaviour How to potty train Bedwetting in young children Potty training problems Why play is important Play ideas and reading Keeping babies and toddlers active Helping your child's speech Teaching everyday essentials Looking after an active toddler Difficult behaviour in children Temper tantrums Separation anxiety First day at school Twins Twins' language development Twins at school Safety and accidents First aid kit for your baby Baby and toddler safety Safety in the sun Baby accidents: what to do Resuscitating a baby Helping a choking baby Teaching your child to stay safe Car seats and child car safety Parenting Planning another pregnancy Children and new siblings Services and support for parents Rights and benefits for parents Lone parents Being a parent Help with childcare Sign up for weekly baby and toddler emails You are here: Health A-Z Pregnancy and baby Share: Save: Print: Pregnancy due date calculator The calculator on this page can help you work out when you might expect your baby to arrive. This will give you a rough idea. As part of your antenatal care, your midwife will also offer you a dating scan that will give you a more accurate date for the birth of your baby. Pregnancy normally lasts from 37 weeks to 42 weeks from the first day of your last period. To find your due date, use the drop down menus below to enter the date of the first day of your last period, and click 'calculate date' - the calculator will do the rest.   Due Date Calculator What was the date of the first day of your last period? DD 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 MM 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 2015 2016 Some women's cycles are not exactly 28 days. If your cycle is shorter or longer than 28 days, please adjust the number below. Adjusted cycle length: 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44      Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy   If you would like to save your due date, you will need to log in or create an NHS Choices account - you can do this in the box below. Creating an NHS Choices account will also allow you to write and save your birth plan online.   Log in or create a Choices account if you would like to save your due date. You can come back and change it as many times as you want. Page last reviewed: 02\/06\/2015 Next review due: 02\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1173 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 551  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 208  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 117  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 78  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 219  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Get NHS pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for week-by-week tips you can trust from NHS experts Related articles Healthy diet in pregnancy Exercise in pregnancy Antenatal care Common problems in pregnancy External links Money Advice Service: budgeting for a new family Foods to avoid in pregnancy Find out which foods to take care with in pregnancy. Includes cheeses, eggs, meat and the latest on nuts Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Premature ejaculation","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Ejaculation-problems","content":"Ejaculation problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Ejaculation problems  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Ejaculation-problems Clinical trials Ejaculation problems   Ejaculation problems are common sexual problems in men. The three main problems are: premature ejaculation  delayed ejaculation  retrograde ejaculation  These are described in more detail below. If you have a problem with ejaculation, visit your GP, who will discuss the problem with you and may examine you or refer you to a specialist. Premature ejaculation Premature ejaculation is the most common ejaculation problem. It's where the male ejaculates too quickly during sexual intercourse. A study looking at 500 couples from five different countries found the average time taken to ejaculate during intercourse was around five-and-a-half minutes. However, it's up to each couple to decide if they\u2019re happy with the time taken \u2013 there\u2019s no definition of how long sex should last. Occasional episodes of premature ejaculation are common and aren't a cause for concern. However, if you're finding that around half of your attempts at sex result in premature ejaculation, it might help to get treatment. Causes of premature ejaculation  Various psychological and physical factors can cause a man to suddenly experience premature ejaculation. Common physical causes include: prostate problems thyroid problems \u2013 an overactive or underactive thyroid gland   using recreational drugs Common psychological causes include: depression  stress  relationship problems anxiety about sexual performance (particularly at the start of a new relationship, or when a man has had previous problems with sexual performance) It's possible, but less common, for a man to have always experienced premature ejaculation since becoming sexually active. A number of possible causes for this are: Conditioning \u2013 it's possible that early sexual experiences can influence future sexual behaviour. For example, if a teenager conditions himself to ejaculate quickly to avoid being caught masturbating, it may later be difficult to break the habit. A traumatic sexual experience from childhood \u2013 this can range from being caught masturbating to sexual abuse. A strict upbringing and beliefs about sex. Biological reasons \u2013 some men may find their penis is extra sensitive. Treating premature ejaculation There are a number of things you can try yourself before seeking medical help. Measures you can try yourself It can sometimes help to: masturbate an hour or two before having sex use a thick condom to help decrease sensation take a deep breath to briefly shut down the ejaculatory reflex (an automatic reflex of the body during which ejaculation occurs) have sex with your partner on top (to allow them to pull away when you are close to ejaculating) take breaks during sex and think about something boring Couples therapy If you're in a long-term relationship, you may benefit from having couples therapy. During these sessions, the therapist will: encourage couples to explore any relationship issues they have, and give them advice about resolving them show the couple techniques that can help the man \"unlearn\" the habit of premature ejaculation (the two most popular techniques are the \"squeeze\" and \"stop-go\" techniques) In the squeeze technique, the woman masturbates the man, but stops before the point of ejaculation and squeezes the head of his penis for between 10 to 20 seconds. She then lets go and waits for another 30 seconds before resuming masturbation. This process is carried out several times before ejaculation is allowed to occur. The stop-go technique is similar, but the woman doesn\u2019t squeeze the penis. Once the man feels more confident about delaying ejaculation, the couple can begin to have sex, stopping and starting as required. These techniques may sound simple, but they require lots of practice. Antidepressants (SSRIs) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are designed to treat depression, but they also delay ejaculation. SSRIs used for this purpose include: paroxetine sertraline fluoxetine Some men may experience an improvement as soon as treatment begins. However, you'll usually need to take the medication for one to two weeks before you notice the full effects. Side effects of SSRIs are usually mild and should improve after two to three weeks. They include: fatigue feeling sick and being sick diarrhoea  excessive sweating Read more about the side effects of SSRIs. Dapoxetine An SSRI specifically designed to treat premature ejaculation, known as dapoxetine (Priligy), has now been licensed in the UK. Local NHS authorities can choose to prescribe it on the NHS. It acts much faster than the SSRIs mentioned above and can be used \"on demand\". You\u2019ll usually be advised to take it between one and three hours before sex, but not more than once a day. Your response to the treatment will then be reviewed after four weeks (or after six doses), and again every six months. Dapoxetine isn't suitable for all men diagnosed with premature ejaculation. For example, it is not recommended for some men with heart, kidney and liver problems. It can also interact with other medications, such as other antidepressants. Common side effects include: headaches dizziness feeling sick Topical anaesthetics and condoms The use of topical anaesthetics such as lidocaine or prilocaine can help but may be transferred and absorbed to the vagina, causing decreased sensation. Condoms can also be used and are effective, particularly when combined with local anaesthesia. Delayed ejaculation Delayed ejaculation (male orgasmic disorder) is classed as either: experiencing a significant delay before ejaculation being unable to ejaculate at all, even though the man wants to and his erection is normal You may have delayed ejaculation if: you experience a repeated and unwanted delay before ejaculation lasting for 30 to 60 minutes you're unable to ejaculate at least half the times you have sex Causes of delayed ejaculation Like premature ejaculation, delayed ejaculation can be caused by psychological and physical factors. Possible psychological causes of delayed ejaculation are similar to those of premature ejaculation \u2013 for example, early sexual trauma, strict upbringing, relationship problems, stress or depression. Physical causes of delayed ejaculation include: diabetes (usually only type 1 diabetes) spinal cord injuries multiple sclerosis surgery to the bladder or prostate gland increasing age Many medicines are known to cause delayed ejaculation, including: antidepressants, particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) medications to treat high blood pressure, such as beta-blockers antipsychotics, used to treat episodes of psychosis  muscle relaxants such as balcofen, which is widely used to treat motor neurone disease and multiple sclerosis powerful painkillers, such as methadone (which is also widely used to treat people addicted to heroin) Delayed ejaculation can suddenly start to happen after previously having no problems, or (less commonly) the man may have always experienced it. It can occur in all sexual situations, or only in certain situations. For example, you may be able to ejaculate normally when masturbating, but not during sex. When ejaculation only occurs in certain situations, there's usually a psychological cause. Treating delayed ejaculation Sex therapy Sex therapy is a form of counselling that uses a combination of psychotherapy and structured changes in your sex life. This can help to increase your feeling of enjoyment during sex, and help make ejaculation easier. Some clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) provide a sex therapy service on the NHS. Availability can vary widely depending on where you live. You can also pay privately. Prices per session are around £50 to £80. The College of Sexual and Relationship Therapists website provides information about private sex therapists and how to find a therapist in your local area. The relationship counselling service Relate also offers sex therapy at a number of its centres. You\u2019ll need to pay for each session.  During sex therapy, you\u2019ll have the opportunity to discuss any emotional or psychological issues related to your sexuality and relationship, in a non-judgemental way. Activities may also be recommended for you to try at home while you're having sex with your partner (you should never be asked to take part in any sexual activities during a session with the therapist). These may include: viewing erotic videos and magazines before having sex to increase the feeling of stimulation erotic fantasies and \"sex games\" to make your lovemaking more exciting using lubricating creams, or jellies, to make the physical act of sex more comfortable and relaxing using sexual aids, such as vibrators, to increase pleasure Read more information about what a sex therapist can do. Switching medication There are a number of medications that can be used if it's thought SSRIs are responsible for causing delayed ejaculation. These include: amantadine \u2013 originally designed to treat viral infections buproprion \u2013 usually prescribed to help people quit smoking yohimbine \u2013 originally designed to treat erectile dysfunction These help block some of the chemical effects of SSRIs that may contribute towards delayed ejaculation. Alcohol and drugs Alcohol misuse and drug use can be separate underlying causes of delayed ejaculation, so addressing these problems may help. Read more about getting help with alcohol misuse and drug use. Pseudoephedrine Pseudoephedrine tablets may be tried, but these will need to be prescribed \"off-label\". This means the medicine shows promise in treating delayed ejaculation but it hasn't been licensed for this particular use (pseudoephedrine is normally used as a decongestant).  Retrograde ejaculation Retrograde ejaculation is a rarer type of ejaculation problem. It happens when semen travels backwards into the bladder instead of through the urethra (the tube that urine passes through). The main symptoms of retrograde ejaculation include: producing no semen, or only a small amount, during ejaculation producing cloudy urine (because of the semen in it) when you first go to the toilet after having sex Men with retrograde ejaculation still experience the feeling of an orgasm and the condition doesn't pose a danger to health. However, it can affect the ability to father a child. Causes of retrograde ejaculation Retrograde ejaculation is caused by damage to the nerves or muscles that surround the neck of the bladder (the point where the urethra connects to the bladder). Usually when you ejaculate, semen is pushed out of your urethra. It is prevented from entering your bladder by the muscles around the neck of the bladder, which close tightly at the moment of orgasm. However, damage to the surrounding muscles or nerves can stop the bladder neck closing, causing the semen to move into the bladder rather than up through the urethra. Prostate gland surgery or bladder surgery is the most common cause of retrograde ejaculation. Other causes are diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and a class of medicines known as alpha blockers, which are often used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). Treating retrograde ejaculation Most men do not need treatment for retrograde ejaculation because they are still able to enjoy a healthy sex life and the condition does not have adverse effects on their health. But if treatment is required (usually because of wanting to father a child), there are options to try. For example, pseudoephedrine (commonly used as a decongestant) has proved effective in treating retrograde ejaculation caused by diabetes or surgery. If retrograde ejaculation is caused by using a certain medication, then normal ejaculation will usually return once medication is stopped. Speak to your GP before stopping any prescribed medication. However, if the retrograde ejaculation has been caused by significant muscle or nerve damage, treatment may not be possible. Men who want to have children can have sperm taken from their urine for use in artificial insemination or in-vitro fertilisation (IVF). Involve your partner If you are having problems with your sex life and are seeking treatment, it is usually recommended you involve your partner as much as possible. Communicating your concerns can often go a long way to helping to resolve them. And in some cases your partner may also have their own problems that are contributing towards problems with your sex life. For example some women are unable to reach climax during \"normal\" intercourse and require manual or oral stimulation. Read more about why talking about sex is important. Blood in your semen Finding blood in your semen (haematospermia) can be alarming. However, in most cases it's not serious and will pass within a few days. The most likely cause is infection of your urethra (urethritis) or prostate (prostatitis). See your GP or visit your local genito-urinary medicine (GUM) clinic if the symptoms persist, because the causes may be more serious. Read more about blood in the semen. Page last reviewed: 17\/07\/2016 Next review due: 17\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 325 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 150  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Erectile dysfunction SSRIs Talking about sex External links Sexual Advice Association Relate Institute of Psychosexual Medicine COSRT: College of Sexual and Relationship Therapists FPA: find a clinic Good sex How to have a fulfilling sex life, including sex tips, and talking to your partner The male midlife crisis The male midlife crisis is something people joke about, but it can be distressing for those going through it Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Premenstrual syndrome","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Premenstrual-syndrome","content":"Premenstrual syndrome - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Premenstrual-syndrome Clinical trials Premenstrual syndrome Premenstrual-syndrome Symptoms Premenstrual-syndrome Causes Premenstrual-syndrome Treatment Introduction  Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is the name given to the physical, psychological and behavioural symptoms that can occur in the two weeks before a woman's monthly period. It's also known as premenstrual tension (PMT). There are many different symptoms of PMS, but typical examples are: bloating breast pain mood swings feeling irritable loss of interest in sex These symptoms usually improve when your period starts and disappear a few days afterwards. Nearly all women of childbearing age have some premenstrual symptoms, but women in their late 20s to their early 40s are most likely to experience PMS. Around 1 in every 20 women have symptoms that are severe enough to stop them living their normal lives. This is often the result of a more intense type of PMS known as premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). Read more about the symptoms of PMS. When to see your GP You should see your GP if you're finding it difficult to deal with the symptoms of PMS. They can help determine if you have PMDD, and may be able to offer you advice and treatment to manage the symptoms you're experiencing. Why it happens The exact cause of PMS isn't fully understood. However, it's thought to be linked to the changing levels of hormones in the body during a woman's menstrual cycle. The fact that PMS improves during pregnancy and after the menopause, when hormone levels are stable, supports this theory. Certain lifestyle factors are also thought to aggravate the symptoms of PMS, including: lack of exercise and being overweight stress a poor diet Read more about the causes of PMS. Managing PMS symptoms Certain lifestyle changes may help you manage PMS if your symptoms aren't severe. These include: a healthy diet regular exercise to improve your health and fitness learning techniques to help relieve stress regular sleep Psychological therapy or hormone medications may be recommended in more severe cases. Read more about treating PMS. Page last reviewed: 17\/12\/2015 Next review due: 17\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 77 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 30  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Common questions about women's health Periods Women's health 18-39 External links National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome (NAPS) Women's Health Concern Menstrual cycle Find out about the menstrual cycle, periods, what's normal, PMS and fertility Women's health 18-39 Healthy living advice for women aged 18-39, including real stories, fitness, diet, fertility and sexual health Find and choose services for Premenstrual syndrome Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pre-school booster","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/vaccinations\/Pages\/4-in-1-pre-school-dtap-ipv-booster.aspx","content":"4-in-1 pre-school booster - Vaccinations - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Vaccinations All about vaccinations The NHS vaccination schedule A list of the vaccines that are routinely offered to children and adults in the UK on the NHS How vaccines work Find out how vaccines stimulate the immune system to fight deadly diseases Vaccine ingredients Killed or live? Eggs or mercury? What's in vaccines...and why Is vaccination safe? Vaccines are extensively tested before they're used on children and adults Risks and benefits It's official. Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Vaccine side effects What to do if you or your child have suspected side effects after a vaccine Vaccine myths We bust common myths eg you CAN take your baby swimming before their jabs All in the past The fascinating story of vaccination goes back to ancient Greece Vaccines save lives The killer diseases of previous centuries have now been all but wiped out Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects NHS vaccination schedule 8 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine Rotavirus vaccine Men B vaccine 12 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (2nd dose) Rotavirus vaccine (2nd dose) 16 weeks 5-in-1 vaccine (3rd dose) Pneumococcal vaccine (2nd dose) Men B vaccine (2nd dose) 1 year MMR vaccine Hib\/Men C vaccine Pneumococcal vaccine (3rd dose) Men B vaccine (3rd dose) 2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one and two Children's annual flu vaccine 3 years and 4 months 4-in-1 pre-school booster MMR vaccine (2nd dose) 12-13 years HPV vaccine 14 years 3-in-1 teenage booster vaccine Men ACWY vaccine 65 and over Pneumococcal vaccine Annual flu vaccine 70 years Shingles vaccine Vaccines only for 'at risk' groups BCG (TB) vaccine (birth to age 35) Chickenpox vaccine (any age) Flu vaccine (adults) Flu vaccine (children) Pneumococcal vaccine (2 years to 65 years) Hepatitis B vaccine (birth onwards) Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Travel vaccines Babies and toddlers Vaccine guidance Why vaccinate your kids When to vaccinate your child Can vaccines 'overload ' a baby's immune system? Vaccinating premature babies Vaccine ingredients Vaccine myths Vaccination tips Vaccination tips for parents Questions about kids' vaccines Vaccines for 'at risk' babies and toddlers Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine (8, 12 and 16 weeks) 5-in-1 vaccine 5-in-1 vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine (8 and 12 weeks) Rotavirus vaccine Which babies should have the rotavirus vaccine? Rotavirus vaccine side effects Rotavirus vaccine FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine (8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year) Pneumococcal vaccine Who should have the pneumococcal vaccine? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Men B vaccine (8, 16 weeks and one year) Men B vaccine Which babies should have the Men B vaccine? Men B vaccine side effects Hib Men C vaccine (one year) Hib\/Men C vaccine Hib\/Men C side effects Hib\/Men C vaccine FAQs MMR vaccine (one year) MMR vaccine How the MMR vaccine is given Who should have the MMR vaccine? MMR side effects MMR vaccine FAQs MMR: Charlotte's story Measles outbreak: what to do Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs Chickenpox vaccine (where advised) Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine When is the BCG (TB) vaccine needed? BCG (TB) vaccine side effects BCG (TB) vaccine FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Children and teens Vaccination tips Top 10 questions about childhood vaccinations Vaccine myths MMR vaccine Mumps vaccine for teenagers Vaccines for 'at risk' children and teens Children's flu vaccine Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine 4-in-1 pre-school booster (3 years and 4 months) 4-in-1 children's pre-school booster 4-in-1 booster side effects MMR vaccine (3 years and 4 months) MMR vaccine Who should have the MMR vaccine? How the MMR vaccine is given MMR vaccine side effects Measles outbreak: advice for parents MMR vaccine FAQs Annual flu vaccine (2, 3 and 4 years plus school years one, two and three) Children's flu vaccine Children's flu vaccine side effects Children's flu vaccine FAQs HPV vaccine (12-13 years) Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Why is the HPV vaccine needed? Who should have the HPV vaccine? How is the HPV vaccine given? HPV vaccine cautions HPV vaccine side effects HPV vaccine safety HPV vaccination: parents' rights Men ACWY vaccine (14 years) Men ACWY vaccine 3-in-1 teenage booster (14 years) 3-in-1 teenage booster Which children should have the 3-in-1 teenage booster? 3-in-1 teenage booster side effects 3-in-1 teenage booster: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner How to report vaccine side effects Childhood vaccination schedule Adults Vaccines for 'at-risk' people The flu jab Chickenpox vaccine BCG (TB) vaccine Flu jab for pregnant women Whooping cough vaccine for pregnant women Hepatitis B vaccine MMR for non-immune adults Men ACWY vaccine for students Vaccines for over-65s Pneumococcal PPV vaccine Annual flu vaccine Vaccines for 70s Shingles vaccine Flu vaccine Flu jab Who should have the flu jab? Who shouldn't have the flu jab? How the flu jab works Flu jab side effects Flu jab: FAQs Chickenpox vaccine Chickenpox vaccine Who should have the chickenpox vaccine? Chickenpox vaccine side effects Chickenpox vaccine: FAQs Pneumococcal vaccine Pneumococcal vaccination When is pneumococcal vaccine needed? Pneumococcal vaccine side effects Hepatitis B vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine Who can have the shingles vaccine Shingles vaccine side effects Shingles vaccine FAQs BCG (TB) vaccine (where advised) BCG (TB) vaccine Who should have the BCG vaccine? BCG vaccine side effects BCG vaccine: FAQs Get your personalised NHS vaccine wall planner Travel vaccines How to report vaccine side effects You are here: Health A-Z Vaccinations Share: Save: Print: 4-in-1 pre-school booster The 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine is offered to three-year-old children to boost their protection against four different serious diseases: diphtheria  tetanus  whooping cough polio Children are routinely vaccinated against these illnesses as babies by the 5-in-1 vaccine. The 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine increases their immunity even further. When should children have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? The 4-in-1 booster vaccine is routinely offered to children at the age of three years and four months old.   How is the 4-in-1 vaccine given? It's injected into the child's upper arm. Can the 4-in-1 pre-school booster vaccine be given with other vaccines? The pre-school booster can be given at the same time as other vaccines. It's usually given at the same time as the second dose of the MMR vaccine. This NHS leaflet tells you more about pre-school immunisations (PDF, 835kb). How well does the 4-in-1 pre-school booster work? Studies have shown that the pre-school booster is very effective. In clinical tests, more than 99% of children who had been given the 4-in-1 pre-school booster were protected against tetanus, diphtheria, whooping cough and polio. The vaccine protects children from these infections until they receive their teenage 3-in-1 booster at the age of 14.  The 4-in-1 vaccine not only protects your child against these infections, but also stops them passing the germs on to babies who are too young to have had all of their vaccinations. How safe is the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? Before anyone can be given a vaccine, it has to go through many tests to check that it is safe and that it works. However, the 4-in-1 pre-school booster, like other vaccines, can have side effects in some children. Side effects of the 4-in-1 vaccine are usually mild. Your child may get a little redness, swelling or tenderness where the injection was given that will disappear on its own. This NHS leaflet tells you about common vaccination reactions in young children up to five years of age (PDF, 118kb). There are two different 4-in-1 vaccines that are used in the UK \u2013 Infanrix IPV and REPEVAX. Both vaccines provide good booster responses, so it doesn't matter which one your child is given as their pre-school booster.  Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for Infanrix IPV (PDF, 68kb). Read the patient information leaflet (PIL) for REPEVAX (PDF, 30kb). Read more about the 4-in-1 pre-school booster side effects. Which children can't have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine? The vast majority of children can have the 4-in-1 booster vaccine, but there are a few children who shouldn't have it. They include children who: are allergic to the vaccine have a fever at the time of the vaccination appointment The vaccine should not be given to children who have had an anaphylactic reaction (severe allergic reaction) to any part of the vaccine before. There is no need to postpone vaccination if your child has a minor illness, such as a cough or a cold with no fever. But if your baby is ill with a fever, it's best to delay vaccination until they have recovered. Why is inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) used rather than oral polio vaccine (OPV), as in the past? Oral polio vaccine (OPV) was used from the 1960s because the live vaccine provided better community-wide protection against polio. Now that polio has been wiped out from large parts of the world, the risk of polio is so low that it is an appropriate time to switch to inactivated polio vaccine, which is given as an injection and does not carry the risk of paralytic polio. Can you get polio from the polio part of this vaccine? The 4-in-1 pre-school booster uses inactivated polio vaccine, which cannot cause polio.  Page last reviewed: 18\/05\/2016 Next review due: 18\/05\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 76 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 53  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Whooping cough Find out about whooping cough, a highly contagious infection of the airways that can be serious in young children NHS Choices links Common questions about vaccination NHS vaccination schedule External links healthtalk.org: real-life vaccination stories from parents   NHS leaflet: common side effects after vaccination in babies and young children (PDF, 118kb) NHS leaflet: pre-school immunisations (PDF 835kb) Search for services Find a GP surgery in your area Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pressure ulcers","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Pressure-ulcers","content":"Pressure ulcers - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pressure ulcers  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pressure-ulcers Clinical trials Pressure ulcers Pressure-ulcers Symptoms Pressure-ulcers Causes Pressure-ulcers Diagnosis Pressure-ulcers Treatment Pressure-ulcers Complications Pressure-ulcers Prevention Introduction  Pressure ulcers are an injury that breaks down the skin and underlying tissue. They are caused when an area of skin is placed under pressure. They are sometimes known as \"bedsores\" or \"pressure sores\".   Pressure ulcers can range in severity from patches of discoloured skin to open wounds that expose the underlying bone or muscle. Read more about the symptoms of pressure ulcers. How pressure ulcers develop Pressure ulcers can develop when a large amount of pressure is applied to an area of skin over a short period of time. They can also occur when less pressure is applied over a longer period of time. The extra pressure disrupts the flow of blood through the skin. Without a blood supply, the affected skin becomes starved of oxygen and nutrients, and begins to break down, leading to an ulcer forming. Pressure ulcers tend to affect people with health conditions that make it difficult to move, especially those confined to lying in a bed or sitting for prolonged periods of time. Conditions that affect the flow of blood through the body, such as type 2 diabetes, can also make a person more vulnerable to pressure ulcers. Learn more about the causes of pressure ulcers. Who is affected? It's estimated that just under half a million people in the UK will develop at least one pressure ulcer in any given year. This is usually people with an underlying health condition \u2013 for example, around 1 in 20 people who are admitted to hospital with a sudden illness will develop a pressure ulcer. People over 70 years old are particularly vulnerable to pressure ulcers, as they are more likely to have mobility problems and ageing skin. Treating and preventing pressure ulcers Treatment for pressure ulcers includes the use of dressings, creams and gels designed to speed up the healing process and relieve pressure. Surgery is sometimes recommended for the most serious cases. For some people, pressure ulcers are an inconvenience that require minor nursing care. For others, they can be serious and lead to life-threatening complications, such as blood poisoning or gangrene.  Read more about the complications of pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcers can be unpleasant, upsetting and challenging to treat. Therefore, a range of techniques is used to prevent them developing in the first place. These include: regularly changing a person's position using equipment to protect vulnerable parts of the body \u2013 such as specially designed mattresses and cushions Read about treating pressure ulcers and preventing pressure ulcers for more information. Unfortunately, even with the highest standards of care, it's not always possible to prevent pressure ulcers in particularly vulnerable people. Pressure ulcers, also known as pressure sores, occur when the skin and underlying tissue is damaged  Living with a disability Get practical, financial and emotional support, whether you're disabled or a carer Page last reviewed: 10\/09\/2014 Next review due: 10\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 188 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 47  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Caring at home Cellulitis Disability and social care Equipment and alarms for carers Paralysis Skin care External links NICE: preventing and treating pressure ulcers What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Priapism","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Priapism","content":"Priapism - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Priapism  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Priapism Clinical trials Priapism Priapism Causes Priapism Treatment Introduction  Priapism is a persistent and often painful erection that lasts for several hours. The erection is not necessarily related to sexual stimulation or excitement, and does not subside after ejaculation (when semen is released from the penis). The erection lasts longer than four hours. During this time, the shaft of the penis is rigid and inflexible, but the head of the penis (the glans) is usually soft. The penis is also usually painful or tender. Priapism is a medical emergency \u2013 you should seek immediate medical assistance if you think you have it. If it's not treated within 24 hours, your penis may be permanently damaged and you may have difficulties getting an erection in the future. Types of priapism There are three main types of priapism: low blood flow (ischaemic) priapism \u2013 the most common and serious type of priapism usually caused by lack of blood flow through the penis high blood flow (non-ischaemic) priapism \u2013 much rarer and usually caused by an injury to the genitals or perineum (the area in between the genitals and anus) recurrent or intermittant (stuttering) priapism - similar to ischaemic priapism but characterised by recurrent, long-lasting, painful erections that ease after 2-3 hours. What causes priapism? Priapism happens when blood that fills the spongy tissue of the penis during an erection is unable to flow out of the penis. Anything that affects the nervous system or blood flow (or both) can trigger priapism. It can occur, for example, as a complication of sickle cell anaemia (a genetic blood disorder), or as a rare side effect of several other medications, such as antipsychotic agents or anticoagulants. Read more about the causes of priapism. Treating priapism If you have ischaemic (low blood flow) priapism, the sooner you receive treatment, the more effective it is likely to be. Aspiration, a procedure that uses a needle and syringe to drain the blood out of your penis, is usually recommended. If this does not work, medication may be injected into your penis which squeezes the blood vessels and helps push the blood out of your penis. Surgery is only recommended if other treatments have failed. There are a number of different surgical procedures available, depending on the type of priapism you have. Read more about how priapism is treated. Discovering the cause Blood tests may be needed to find out what is causing your priapism. These can help detect underlying problems with your blood, such as anaemia (a lack of red blood cells), or unusually high numbers of white blood cells. Blood tests can also measure the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in your blood. Unusually low levels of oxygen and high levels of carbon dioxide would strongly suggest ischaemic priapism (low blood flow). If non-ischaemic priapism is suspected due to an injury to your genitals or the surrounding area, you may be referred for a scan, such as an ultrasound scan. This will help identify problems with the blood vessels in your penis. How common is priapism? Priapism is rare in the general population, but fairly common in certain high-risk groups, such as males with sickle cell anaemia, and men taking medication for erectile dysfunction. About one in four boys and nine in 10 men with sickle cell anaemia will experience at least one episode of priapism. The risk of priapism as a side effect of treatment for erectile dysfunction is low and thought to be around one in 1,000. JavaScript and the Flash Player are required to view NHS Choices tools. JavaScript can be switched on through your browser options. If you do not have a version of the Flash Player you can download the free Adobe Flash Player from Adobe Systems Incorporated. Media last reviewed: 26\/02\/2015 Next review due: 26\/02\/2017 Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 10\/02\/2015 Next review due: 10\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 19 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Ejaculation problems Erectile dysfunction Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Penis health Sexual arousal in men Sickle cell anaemia External links Male Health Forum: priapism Male sexual dysfunction Don't suffer in silence with erection problems or premature ejaculation: find out the causes and treatments Male sexual arousal The four stages of sexual arousal in men include excitement, plateau and orgasm. Find out more Penis health All you need to know to keep your penis clean, healthy and fit for purpose Find and choose services for Priapism Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prickly heat","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prickly-heat","content":"Prickly heat - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prickly heat  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prickly-heat Clinical trials Prickly heat   Prickly heat, also known as miliaria rubra, is an itchy rash of small, raised red spots that causes a stinging or prickling sensation on the skin. Prickly heat can develop anywhere on the body, but it usually appears on your face, neck, back, chest or thighs a few days after exposure to hot temperatures. The rash is made up of tiny spots or bumps that are surrounded by an area of red skin. The spots sometimes look like tiny blisters and can cause: mild swelling itching a stinging or intense prickling sensation Causes of prickly heat Prickly heat usually develops when a person sweats more than usual, such as during hot or humid weather. However, it's also possible to get prickly heat in the winter. The condition is caused when the body's sweat glands become blocked. Excessive sweating can result in sweat becoming trapped beneath your skin. The trapped sweat causes skin irritation and the characteristic heat rash. The symptoms of prickly heat are usually worse in areas that are covered by clothing. This is because clothing can make you sweat and sometimes causes friction (rubbing). Who gets prickly heat? Although anyone can get prickly heat, you're more at risk of developing it if you're in a hot climate where you sweat more than usual. The following also increase your risk: illness and immobility \u2013 long periods of time spent in bed can make you sweat more, particularly if you have warm bedding wearing too much clothing, particularly in the winter sitting too close to a fire or heater being overweight or obese \u2013 which is more likely to lead to excessive sweating Babies and children are also more at risk of getting prickly heat, because their sweat glands aren't fully developed. Treating prickly heat Prickly heat isn't a serious condition and rarely requires any specific treatment. The rash usually disappears after a few days. However, there are several things you can do to ease your symptoms: Avoid excessive heat and humidity \u2013 if you need to go outside, spend time in the shade or take a small fan with you. Further exposure to the heat will cause you to sweat more and may make your rash worse. Drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration, especially in hot weather. Wear loose cotton clothing \u2013 avoid wearing synthetic fibres, such as polyester and nylon, which trap heat easier than natural fibres. Keep your skin cool \u2013 a cool bath or shower will cool you down, soothe your skin and help prevent further sweating. Staying in an air-conditioned room for a few hours a day will also provide considerable relief. You can also use a cold compress, but don't leave it on the skin for longer than 20 minutes. Use calamine lotion \u2013 this is available at most pharmacies and will help soothe sore and irritated skin. Try hydrocortisone cream \u2013 low-strength hydrocortisone cream is also available from pharmacies and is effective at treating very itchy and irritated areas of skin. However, avoid using it on your face and always follow the instructions. Antihistamine tablets may help control itching \u2013 but consult your GP first as they're not always suitable Read more about staying safe in the sun. Babies and rashes If your baby has a rash and appears to be unwell, you should visit your GP or contact NHS 111. Prickly heat is common in babies and doesn't cause any serious harm. However, if you're concerned, your GP will be able to confirm the cause of your baby's rash and give appropriate treatment. Read more about skin rashes in babies. Page last reviewed: 19\/04\/2016 Next review due: 19\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 727 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 259  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 159  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 156  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Child sun safety Heat exhaustion and heatstroke Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) Summer health External links Easy read sun care advice St John Ambulance: heat rash Summer health Be healthy and safe this summer, throughout heatwaves, barbecues, hay fever, stings and in the swimming pool Skin rashes in babies Most rashes in babies are harmless and clear on their own. Find out about the common causes Itching Itching is a common symptom that can be caused by a number of conditions. Find out why it happens and what you can do about it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Primary biliary cirrhosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Primary-biliary-cirrhosis","content":"Primary biliary cirrhosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Primary biliary cirrhosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Clinical trials Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Community Primary biliary cirrhosis Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Symptoms Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Causes Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Diagnosis Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Treatment Primary-biliary-cirrhosis Complications Introduction  Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a long-term liver disease in which the bile ducts in the liver become damaged. This gradually leads to a build-up of bile in the liver, which can damage it and eventually lead to scarring (cirrhosis). PBC doesn't always cause any symptoms in the early stages, but some people may experience: fatigue (extreme tiredness) itchy skin dry eyes and mouth pain or discomfort in the upper right corner of their tummy Many people are only diagnosed with PBC after a problem with their liver is picked up during a routine blood test that is carried out for another reason. Read more about the symptoms of PBC and diagnosing PBC. What causes PBC? Bile is a liquid produced inside the liver that is used to help digest fats and remove toxins from the body. It passes out of the liver through small tubes called bile ducts. In PBC, for reasons not fully understood, the immune system (the body's natural defence against infection and illness) mistakenly attacks the bile ducts. This gradually causes the bile ducts to become swollen and scarred, obstructing the flow of bile out of the liver. Bile then starts to build up in the liver, which damages it and may lead to cirrhosis. Read more about the causes of PBC. Who is affected It's not clear how many people are affected by PBC in the UK. Estimates vary from around 15,000 to 20,000 people. The rates of PBC in the UK are higher than in some other parts of the world. The reason for this is unknown. About 90% of those affected are women and most cases are diagnosed in people aged 40-60, although PBC can be diagnosed at any age from 20 onwards. How PBC is treated PBC is a progressive condition, which means the damage to the liver can get steadily worse over time. The rate at which PBC progresses varies between individuals. In some cases, it can take decades. If not treated, the liver can become damaged to such an extent that it no longer works properly. This is known as liver failure and it can be fatal. There are medications that can help slow the progression of the condition and help relieve the itchiness associated with it. In cases where there is extensive liver damage, a liver transplant may be required. Read more about treating PBC and the complications of PBC. Liver health: an animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. An educational animation on liver health and disease prevention. Inspired by Jazzy, a teenager living with hepatitis C. Media last reviewed: 27\/04\/2015 Next review due: 27\/04\/2017 Page last reviewed: 06\/11\/2014 Next review due: 06\/11\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 127 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cirrhosis Liver transplant Osteoporosis External links British Liver Trust: liver transplants British Liver Trust: PBC NHSBT: organ donation PBC Foundation: about PBC Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Tiredness and fatigue What makes you tired, plus how to boost your energy with an energy diet and other self-help tips Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Primary biliary cirrhosis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prion disease","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease","content":"Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Clinical trials Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Symptoms Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Causes Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Diagnosis Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Treatment Creutzfeldt-Jakob-disease Prevention Introduction  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare and fatal condition that affects the brain. It causes brain damage that worsens rapidly over time. Symptoms of CJD include: loss of intellect and memory change in personality loss of balance and co-ordination slurred speech vision problems and blindness abnormal jerking movements progressive loss of brain function and mobility Most people with CJD will die within a year of the symptoms starting, usually from infection. This is because the immobility caused by CJD can make people with the condition vulnerable to infection. Read more about the symptoms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and diagnosing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. What causes CJD? CJD appears to be caused by an abnormal infectious protein called a prion. These prions accumulate at high levels in the brain and cause irreversible damage to nerve cells, resulting in the symptoms described above. While the abnormal prions are technically infectious, they're very different to viruses and bacteria. For example, prions aren't destroyed by the extremes of heat and radiation used to kill bacteria and viruses, and antibiotics or antiviral medicines have no effect on them. Read more about the causes of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Types of CJD There are four main types of CJD, which are described below. Sporadic CJD Sporadic CJD is the most common type. The precise cause of sporadic CJD is unclear, but it's been suggested that a normal brain protein changes abnormally ('misfolds') and turns into a prion. Most cases of sporadic CJD occur in adults aged between 45 and 75. On average, symptoms develop at age 60-65 years. Despite being the most common type of CJD, sporadic CJD is still very rare, affecting only one or two people in every million each year in the UK. In the UK during 2014, there were 90 recorded deaths from sporadic CJD. Variant CJD Variant CJD is likely to be caused by consuming meat from a cow that had bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or 'mad cow disease'), a similar prion disease to CJD. Since the link between variant CJD and BSE was discovered in 1996, strict controls have proved very effective in preventing meat from infected cattle from entering the food chain (see preventing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease for more information). However, the average time it takes for the symptoms of variant CJD to occur after initial infection (the incubation period) is still unclear. The incubation period could be very long (over 10 years) in some people, so those exposed to infected meat before the food controls were introduced can still develop variant CJD. The prion that causes variant CJD can also be transmitted by blood transfusion, although this has only happened four times in the UK. There have been 177 recorded cases of variant CJD in the UK to date and there were no recorded deaths from the condition in the UK during 2014. Familial or inherited CJD Familial CJD is a very rare genetic condition where one of the genes a person inherits from their parent (the prion protein gene) carries a mutation that causes prions to form in their brain during adulthood, triggering the symptoms of CJD. It affects about 1 in every 9 million people in the UK. The symptoms of familial CJD usually first develop in the early 50s. In the UK during 2014, there were 10 deaths from familial CJD and similar inherited prion diseases. Iatrogenic CJD Iatrogenic CJD is where the infection is accidentally spread from someone with CJD through medical or surgical treatment. For example, a common cause of iatrogenic CJD in the past was growth hormone treatment using human pituitary growth hormones extracted from deceased individuals, some of whom were infected with CJD. Synthetic versions of human growth hormone have been used since 1985, so this is no longer a risk. Iatrogenic CJD can also occur if instruments used during brain surgery on a person with CJD aren't properly cleaned between each surgical procedure and are re-used on another person. However, increased awareness of these risks means iatrogenic CJD is now very rare. In the UK during 2014, there were just three deaths from iatrogenic CJD (caused by receiving human growth hormone before 1985). How CJD is treated There's currently no cure for CJD, so treatment aims to relieve symptoms and make the affected person feel as comfortable as possible. This can include using medication such as antidepressants to help with anxiety and depression, and painkillers to relieve pain. Some people will need nursing care and assistance with feeding. Read more about treating Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Information about you If you have CJD, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Variant CJD compensation scheme In October 2001, the government announced a compensation scheme for UK victims of variant CJD. A trust fund was set up in April 2001 and payments of £25,000 were made available to most affected families. Page last reviewed: 21\/07\/2015 Next review due: 21\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 167 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 106  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and Support End of life care Living with a long-term condition External links National Prion Clinic National CJD Surveillance Unit CJD Support Network CJD Foundation Antibiotics Antibiotics are medications used to treat \u2013 and, in some cases, prevent \u2013 bacterial infections NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Probiotics","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/probiotics","content":"Probiotics - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Probiotics  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview probiotics Clinical trials Probiotics Introduction  Probiotics are live bacteria and yeasts promoted as having various health benefits. They're usually added to yoghurts or taken as food supplements, and are often described as 'good' or 'friendly' bacteria. Probiotics are thought to help restore the natural balance of bacteria in your gut (including your stomach and intestines) when it has been disrupted by an illness or treatment. Probiotics may be helpful in some cases, but there's little evidence to support many health claims made for them. For example, there\u2019s no evidence to suggest that probiotics can help treat eczema. However, it does seem that for most people probiotics appear to be safe. If you wish to try them \u2013 and you have a healthy immune system \u2013 they shouldn't cause any unpleasant side effects. Potential issues with probiotic yoghurts and food supplements If you're considering trying probiotics, there are a few issues you need to be aware of. Firstly, probiotics are generally classed as food rather than medicine, which means they don't undergo the rigorous testing that medicines do. Because of the way probiotics are regulated, we can\u2019t always be sure that: the product actually contains the bacteria stated on the food label the product contains enough bacteria to have an effect the bacteria are able to survive long enough to reach your gut It's also worth noting that there are many different types of probiotics that may have different effects on the body, and little is known about which types are best. Don't assume the beneficial effects seen with one type are the same as other similar types or will be repeated if used for another purpose. Lastly, there's likely to be a huge difference between the pharmaceutical-grade probiotics that show promise in clinical trials and the yoghurts and supplements sold in shops. The evidence for probiotics Read on or use the links below to find out about the evidence concerning some common uses for probiotics: preventing antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD) treating infectious diarrhoea protecting premature babies from gut disease irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) lactose intolerance pouchitis colic \"boosting the immune system\" vaginal conditions inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) eczema Probiotics can prevent AAD There's fairly good evidence that taking high doses of some probiotics (Lactobacillus rhamnosus or Saccharomyces boulardii) while taking antibiotics can help prevent children getting AAD. Without probiotics, antibiotics can sometimes wipe out the protective gut bacteria, resulting in diarrhoea.  Probiotics given with antibiotics may also reduce the risk of developing a Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) infection. C. difficile are potentially dangerous bacteria that can cause diarrhoea and life-threatening complications. They can infect the gut if the balance of gut bacteria is disturbed by antibiotics. Probiotics are thought to directly kill or inhibit the growth of harmful bacteria, stopping them producing toxic substances that can make you ill. Probiotics may treat infectious diarrhoea There's some evidence that probiotics can shorten an episode of diarrhoea caused by a stomach bug by about a day. However, the evidence isn't yet strong enough to make any treatment recommendations. Read the NHS Choices analysis of research into diarrhoea caused by a stomach bug. Probiotics may help protect premature babies Some babies born prematurely are at risk of a serious condition called necrotising enterocolitis (NEC). This is when tissues in the baby's gut become inflamed and start to die. There's some good evidence that probiotics may reduce the likelihood of premature babies developing NEC, although there are still some uncertainties, and routine use of probiotics in premature babies isn\u2019t currently recommended. Probiotics may help IBS Probiotics may help to reduce bloating and flatulence in some people with IBS.  This is supported by a research published in 2010, although we don't yet know the extent of the benefits, nor the most effective type of probiotic. Probiotics won't work for everyone with IBS, but if you want to try them, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) suggests taking them for at least four weeks, at a dose recommended by the manufacturer, to see if they help.  Read the NICE guidelines for managing IBS in adults. Probiotics may help if you're lactose intolerant Lactose intolerance is a common digestive problem in which the body is unable to digest lactose (a type of sugar found mainly in milk and dairy products). Some studies have found that certain probiotics, such as Lactobacillus acidophilus, may help to reduce the symptoms of lactose intolerance, which include stomach cramps, flatulence and diarrhoea. Research into this is ongoing. In the meantime, if you are lactose intolerant, you may wish to try probiotic preparations (not yoghurts) of Lactobacillus acidophilus to see if they help. Probiotics may help pouchitis Some people with ulcerative colitis need to have part of their bowel removed and a loop of bowel constructed in its place. This loop, or pouch, can sometimes become inflamed, leading to diarrhoea and other problems. This is known as \"pouchitis\". Small studies have shown that adding sachets of a probiotic preparation called VSL#3 to drinks or yoghurts can help treat pouchitis. However, more research is needed before it can be recommended as an effective treatment. Probiotics don't seem to help babies with colic It has been suggested that probiotics may be a useful treatment for babies with colic, but there's little evidence to suggest they're effective. A 2013 study concluded that certain probiotics may help crying infants with colic that are exclusively breastfed. However, generally, it found insufficient evidence that probiotics can help manage colic effectively or prevent infants from crying. Since then, a small but well-conducted study found that these probiotics had no effect on infant colic in either breastfed or bottle-fed babies.  Read the NHS Choices analysis of this research. Do probiotics boost the immune system? Adverts for probiotic yoghurts used to claim they could \"boost your immune system\", but these claims were ruled unproven by The European Food Safety Authority and can no longer be made. There\u2019s a lack of evidence for probiotics benefiting the immune system, and research found that in healthy children, probiotic supplements had no effect on antibody levels, days of fever and number of infections. There's no reason why you should need to \"rebalance\" your gut bacteria if you\u2019re already perfectly healthy, despite the claims in some marketing material.  Probiotics can't be recommended for vaginal conditions There have been suggestions that probiotics can help in the treatment of bacterial vaginosis. However, even when they are taken with antibiotics, there's currently no evidence of any extra benefits. The results of research into probiotics for vaginal thrush have been inconsistent and it's not possible to recommend them as a treatment. Probiotics can't be used for IBD There's a lack of evidence to make any conclusions about the effectiveness of probiotics for relieving symptoms of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. Probiotics are not supported for eczema Some studies have suggested that giving probiotics to young children may reduce their risk of developing eczema, but the evidence is not very strong. There's no evidence to support claims that probiotics can help treat symptoms of eczema. A 2008 review found that probiotics do not reduce eczema symptoms, such as itching, nor do they change the severity of a person's eczema. Page last reviewed: 28\/01\/2016 Next review due: 28\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 403 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 148  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 88  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 22  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 96  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Supplements: who needs them? Good foods to help your digestion External links Cochrane reviews explained How to treat common digestive disorders Digestive complaints such as constipation, diarrhoea, heartburn and bloating are incredibly common but usually treatable Beat the bloat Tips for getting rid of bloating, including cutting out 'windy' foods and fizzy drinks, plus regular exercise NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Problems swallowing pills","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/swallowing-pills","content":"Problems swallowing pills Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Problems swallowing pills  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Swallowing pills Introduction  If you or someone you care for struggles to swallow pills, you should discuss it with your doctor or pharmacist. Alternative forms of the medicine are sometimes available, or you may just need to experiment with some simple swallowing techniques. This page gives some basic advice and outlines the clinical and legal issues around crushing tablets or opening capsules. This advice applies to: adults who have difficulty swallowing pills parents of children who struggle to swallow pills nurses or carers of people with dysphagia (swallowing problems) Finding an alternative form If you or the person you care for finds it difficult to swallow tablets or capsules, you can ask your GP or pharmacist if there's an alternative form of the medicine. The Swallowing Difficulties website and the British National Formulary (BNF) may also have details of possible alternatives. Your pills may also be available in one of the following forms: a liquid \u2013 particularly useful for people with dysphagia who rely on a feeding tube a dispersible \u2013 tablet that disintegrates in water a buccal \u2013 tablet that dissolves when held between cheek and gum a patch a suppository \u2013 inserted into the bottom or vagina  a cream an inhaled version Seek the advice of a doctor or pharmacist if you feel unsure about giving medicine \u2013 for example, if you're not sure how to give liquid medicine through a feeding tube. Crushing tablets or opening capsules You can ask your GP or pharmacist if your tablets can be crushed, or your capsules opened and dispersed in water, before taking them. Only certain tablets or capsules can be given this way. The following preparations should never be crushed without seeking professional advice first: CR or CRT (controlled release, or controlled release tablet) LA (long-acting) SR (sustained release) TR (time release) TD (time delay) SA (sustained action) XL (extended release) These medications are designed to be released over a predetermined period of time \u2013 for example, 12-24 hours. Generally, when crushing a tablet or opening a capsule, the dose is released over 5-10 minutes, resulting in an initial overdose (and a higher chance of side effects), followed by a period without medication. Legal issues A nurse or carer of someone with dysphagia shouldn't alter the form of a medicine by crushing or opening it, unless they've been instructed to do so by a doctor. If you crush or open the medicine to give to another person, you're administering it in an unlicensed form. If you haven't consulted a doctor about it, this would render you personally liable for any harm caused, and you would have to justify your actions in the event of an adverse reaction. The Swallowing Difficulties website has more information about the legal consequences of tablet crushing. 10 tips for swallowing pills 1. Moisten your mouth with saliva or water beforehand (a dry mouth makes swallowing harder). 2. Place the pill in the centre of your tongue, and lengthways along your tongue if the pill is oval-shaped. 3. Immediately take a sip of water and wash the pill directly into your throat, throwing your head back.   4. Hold water in your mouth before inserting the pill \u2013 suspending the pill in water may help to flush it down. 5. Try using a straw to drink the water (the suction may help). 6. Taking a deep breath may help suppress your gag reflex.  7. Try chewing some food before placing the pill in your mouth, and swallow the food and pill together. 8. Insert the pill into a small piece of bread or marshmallow. 9. After swallowing the pill, follow it up with food to help it go down. 10. Try putting your chin to your chest when swallowing \u2013 this will open up your windpipe and may be better for you than throwing your head back. NB: These tips are based on common sense, rather than scientific evidence, and may not work for everyone. Alternative forms of medicines are sometimes available if a person has difficulty swallowing pills   Medicines information Find out why some medicines are available from pharmacists or supermarkets, but others only from your GP, plus how medicines are licensed and regulated Page last reviewed: 10\/10\/2014 Next review due: 10\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 88 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Children's medicines Common questions about medicines Dysphagia (swallowing problems) Medicines information External links British National Formulary (BNF) Swallowing difficulties Medicines for babies and children Not all medicines are suitable for young children. Find out what to use to treat your sick child NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Proctalgia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/anal-pain","content":"Anal pain (proctalgia) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Anal pain (proctalgia)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Anal pain   Anal pain (pain in the bottom) can be distressing, but is often just the result of a minor, treatable condition. The medical name for pain in and around the anus or rectum (back passage) is proctalgia. This pages covers: Common causes of anal pain Less common causes of anal pain When to get medical advice Common causes of anal pain Anal fissures An anal fissure is a small tear in the skin of the anus that can be caused by passing a large or hard poo. Symptoms of an anal fissure can include: a severe, sharp pain when doing a poo a burning or gnawing pain that lasts several hours after doing a poo rectal bleeding \u2013 you may notice a small amount of blood on the toilet paper after you wipe Anal fissures can be very painful, but many heal on their own in a few weeks. Increasing the amount of fibre in your diet, drinking plenty of fluids and taking laxatives and over-the-counter painkillers can help. If the pain persists, you may need special ointment that relaxes the ring of muscle around your anus. Occasionally, surgery may be needed to help the fissure heal. Read more about treatments for anal fissures. Haemorrhoids (piles) Haemorrhoids (piles) are swellings containing enlarged blood vessels that are found inside or around the bottom. They're often thought to be caused by straining on the toilet as a result of prolonged constipation. In many cases, haemorrhoids don't cause symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they may include: bleeding after doing a poo an itchy bottom feeling like there's a lump in or around your anus soreness and redness around your anus anal pain, if the blood supply to the haemorrhoid becomes blocked or interrupted \u2013 for example, by a blood clot The symptoms often pass after a few days. Increasing the amount of fibre in your diet, drinking plenty of fluids and taking laxatives and over-the-counter painkillers can help. If the blood supply to the haemorrhoid has been blocked by a clot, a simple procedure can be carried out to remove the clot under local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed). Read more about treatments for haemorrhoids.  Anal fistulas and abscesses An anal fistula is a small tunnel that develops between the end of the bowel and the skin near the anus. It's usually caused by an infection near the anus resulting in a collection of pus (an abscess). Symptoms of an anal fistula or abscess can include: a constant, throbbing pain that may be worse when you sit down skin irritation around the anus passing pus or blood when you poo swelling and redness around your anus a high temperature (fever) Your GP may prescribe antibiotics if an abscess is picked up early on. If it persists, it may need to be drained in hospital, possibly under general anaesthetic (while you're asleep). If a fistula develops, surgery will usually be needed because they rarely heal by themselves. Read more about treatments for anal fistulas. Less common causes of anal pain Less common causes of anal pain include: proctalgia fugax \u2013 a condition that causes episodes of sudden, severe anal pain that last for a few minutes at a time; medication that relaxes the muscles in the pelvis may help levator ani syndrome \u2013 an aching or pressure sensation in and around the anus that may be constant or last for hours or days at a time; treatment to relax the muscles in the pelvis may help an inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn's disease \u2013 other symptoms can include tummy cramps, bloody diarrhoea and weight loss; treatments are available to help relieve the symptoms an infection \u2013 such as a fungal infection or rectal sexually transmitted infection (STI) a bone-related problem \u2013 such as coccydynia (tailbone pain) or pain that spreads from your lower back, pelvis or hips, caused by arthritis or bone tumours a urinary tract problem \u2013 such as prostatitis (inflammation or infection of the prostate gland) cancer of the anus or lower rectum \u2013 this can have similar symptoms of haemorrhoids and anal fissures, but is much rarer  When to get medical advice Many common causes of anal pain will improve with simple self-care treatments, so you don't always need to see your GP. But it's a good idea to see your GP if: your pain is severe your pain doesn't improve after a few days you also experience rectal bleeding Don't feel embarrassed to see your GP \u2013 anal pain is a common problem that they're used to seeing. Your GP can try to work out what the problem is and give you treatment advice. They'll probably ask to see your bottom and may carry out a rectal examination (where they gently insert a gloved finger into your bottom) to check for any abnormalities. If the cause is not immediately obvious, they may refer you to a specialist for advice and further tests. Page last reviewed: 26\/07\/2016 Next review due: 26\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 234 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 104  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 60  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 29  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Rectal bleeding Itchy bottom Constipation Rectal examination External links British Society of Gastroenterology: piles and other disorders of the bottom Rectal bleeding What to do if you are bleeding from the bottom, and the common causes Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Progestogen only pill","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/contraception-guide\/Pages\/the-pill-progestogen-only.aspx","content":"The progestogen-only pill - Contraception guide - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Contraception guide Getting started What is contraception? How effective is contraception? What services do contraception clinics offer? How do I use a condom? How does the female condom work? Where can I get an implant fitted or removed? Where to get contraception Contraception is free to men and women on the NHS. Find out where you can get contraception, and information about all 15 methods What is emergency contraception? Where can I get emergency contraception? Methods of contraception Combined pill   Progestogen-only pill (POP, mini pill)   Natural family planning   Contraceptive patch   Vaginal ring   Contraceptive injection Contraceptive implant IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Female sterilisation Vasectomy Emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)   What is contraception? Which is best for me? Things to consider when choosing contraception Age, health, lifestyle, side effects How effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy? Methods that may help heavy or painful periods Combined pill Patch IUS (intrauterine system) Vaginal ring Methods you need to think about every day Combined pill Progestogen-only pill Natural family planning (fertility awareness) Methods you need to think about every time you have sex Condoms Female condoms Diaphragm Cap Methods that protect against STIs Condoms Female condoms Methods that last months or years IUD (intrauterine device, coil) IUS (intrauterine system) Implant Injection Permanent methods Female sterilisation Vasectomy (male sterilisation) Contraception after having a baby You can get pregnant 21 days after the birth. Find out which contraceptive methods you can use, when you need to start them, and the ones you should avoid if you're breastfeeding What is contraception? Worries and questions Using contraception effectively Will antibiotics stop my contraception working? What if my partner won't use condoms? I've had unprotected sex Where can I get emergency contraception (morning after pill, IUD)? How effective is emergency contraception? Sterilisation reversal Can I get a female sterilisation reversal on the NHS? Can I get a vasectomy reversal on the NHS? Contraception after a baby When can I use contraception after having a baby? Where can I get contraception? Questions about the pill Missed pills and extra pills What should I do if I miss a pill (combined pill)? What should I do if I miss a pill (progestogen-only pill)? What if I've lost a pill? What if I take an extra pill by accident? Being on the pill What if I'm on the pill and I'm sick or have diarrhoea? Can I take two packets of the pill back-to-back? How do I change to a different pill? Will a pregnancy test work if I'm on the pill? Does the pill interact with other medicines? Periods and the pill When will my periods return after I stop taking the pill? How do I know I've reached menopause if I'm on the pill? The pill for men What is the male pill? Where to get contraception Where you can go for contraception, information and advice You are here: Health A-Z Contraception guide Share: Save: Print: The progestogen-only pill A woman can get pregnant if a man\u2019s sperm reaches one of her eggs (ova). Contraception tries to stop this happening by keeping the egg and sperm apart or by stopping egg production. One method of contraception is the progestogen-only pill (POP). At a glance: the progestogen-only pill   How it works   Who can use it What to do if you miss a pill   Advantages and disadvantages   Risks It contains the hormone progestogen but doesn't contain oestrogen. You need to take the progestogen-only pill at or around the same time every day. The progestogen-only pill thickens the mucus in the cervix, which stops sperm reaching an egg. In can also stop ovulation, depending on the type of progestogen-only pill you take. Newer progestogen-only pills contain desogestrel. At a glance: facts about the progestogen-only pill If taken correctly, it can be more than 99% effective. This means that fewer than one woman in 100 who use the progestogen-only pill as contraception will get pregnant in one year. You take a pill every day, with no break between packs of pills. The progestogen-only pill can be used by women who can't use contraception that contains oestrogen \u2013 for example, because they have high blood pressure, previous blood clots or are overweight.  You can take the progestogen-only pill if you're over 35 and you smoke. You must take the progestogen-only pill at the same time each day \u2013 if you take it more than three hours late (or 12 hours late if you take a desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette) it may not be effective.  If you\u2019re sick (vomit) or have severe diarrhoea, the progestogen-only pill may not work.  Some medicines may affect the progestogen-only pill's effectiveness \u2013 ask your doctor for details.  Your periods may stop or become lighter, irregular or more frequent.  Side effects may include spotty skin and breast tenderness \u2013 these should clear up within a few months.  The progestogen-only pill doesn\u2019t protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). By using condoms as well as the progestogen-only pill, you'll help to protect yourself against STIs. How the progestogen-only pill works How it prevents pregnancy Using the progestogen-only pill Starting the first pack of pills How it prevents pregnancy The progestogen-only pill works by thickening the mucus in the neck of the womb, so it is harder for sperm to penetrate into the womb and reach an egg. Sometimes, depending on the type of progestogen-only pill, it may also prevent ovulation (the release of an egg from your ovaries each month). The desogestrel pill (12-hour pill, such as Cerazette) stops ovulation in 97% of menstrual cycles. This means that if you're using a 12-hour progestogen-only pill, you won't release an egg in 97 cycles out of 100. Using the progestogen-only pill There are two different types of progestogen-only pill: The three-hour progestogen-only pill must be taken within three hours of the same time each day. Examples are Femulen, Micronor, Norgeston and Noriday. The 12-hour progestogen-only pill (desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette) must be taken within 12 hours of the same time each day.  It is important to follow the instructions that come with your pill packet, because missing pills or taking the pill alongside other medicines can reduce its effectiveness. There are 28 pills in a pack of progestogen-only pills. You need to take one pill every day, within either three or 12 hours of the same time each day, depending on which type you are taking. There\u2019s no break between packs of pills \u2013 when you finish one pack, you start the next one the next day. Starting the first pack of pills Choose a convenient time in the day to take your first pill. Continue to take a pill at the same time each day until the pack is finished.  Start your next pack of pills the following day. There is no break between packs of pills. You can get contraception at: most GP surgeries community contraception clinics some GUM clinics sexual health clinics some young people's services Find a clinic near you You can start the progestogen-only pill at any time in your menstrual cycle. If you start it on day one of your menstrual cycle (the first day of your period) it will work straight away and you will be protected against pregnancy. You won\u2019t need additional contraception. If you start the progestogen-only pill on day five of your menstrual cycle or earlier (the fifth day after the start of your period or before) you will be protected from pregnancy straight away unless you have a short menstrual cycle (your period is every 23 days or less). If you have a short menstrual cycle, you will need additional contraception, such as condoms, until you have taken the pill for two days. If you start the progestogen-only pill on any other day of your cycle, you will not be protected from pregnancy straight away and will need additional contraception until you have taken the pill for two days. After having a baby If you have just had a baby, you can start the progestogen-only pill on day 21 after the birth. You will be protected against pregnancy straight away. If you start the progestogen-only pill more than 21 days after giving birth, you will need additional contraception (such as condoms) until you have taken the pill for two days. After a miscarriage or abortion If you have had a miscarriage or abortion, you can start the progestogen-only pill up to five days afterwards and you will be protected from pregnancy straight away. If you start the pill more than five days after a miscarriage or abortion, use additional contraception until you have taken the pill for two days. What to do if you miss a pill If you forget to take a progestogen-only pill, what you should do depends on:  the type of pill you are taking  how long ago you missed the pill and how many pills you have forgotten to take whether you have had sex without using another form of contraception during the previous seven days If you are less than three or less than 12 hours late taking the pill If you are taking a three-hour progestogen-only pill and are less than three hours late taking it, or if you are taking the 12-hour progestogen-only pill and are less than 12 hours late: take the late pill as soon as you remember, and  take the remaining pills as normal, even if that means taking two pills on the same day The pill will still work, and you\u2019ll be protected against pregnancy \u2013 you do not need to use additional contraception. Don\u2019t worry if you have had sex without using another form of contraception. You do not need emergency contraception. If you are more than three or more than 12 hours late taking the pill If you are taking a three-hour progestogen-only pill and are more than three hours late taking it, or are taking the 12-hour progestogen-only pill and are more than 12 hours late you will not be protected against pregnancy. You will need to use additional contraception, such as condoms for two or seven days (depending on what pill you are taking) after missing a pill. You should: take the last pill you missed straight away (if you have missed more than one, take only one) take your next pill at the normal time Depending on when you remember, it may mean taking two pills on the same day (one at the time of remembering, and one at the regular time), or even at the same time. How long you need to use additional contraception such as condoms depends on the type of pill you are taking: If you are taking a three-hour pill (such as Femulen, Micronor, Norgeston or Noriday) you will need to use additional contraception for two days after missing the pill. It takes two days for the pill's contraceptive effect on cervical mucus to be re-established after missing a pill. If you are taking a 12-hour pill that stops ovulation (a desogestrel pill, such as Cerazette), you will need additional contraception for seven days. This is because it takes seven days for the pill's effect on ovulation to be re-established after a missed pill. Emergency contraception If you have recently had unprotected sex, you may need emergency contraception. Seek advice straight away from your GP or local sexual health clinic. You can also call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300 123 7123. Vomiting and diarrhoea If you vomit within two hours of taking a progestogen-only pill, it may not have been fully absorbed into your bloodstream. Take another pill straight away and the next pill at your usual time. If you don\u2019t take the replacement within three hours (or 12 hours for the 12-hour pill) of your normal time, use additional contraception, such as condoms, for two days (seven days for the 12-hour pill). If you continue to be sick, keep using another form of contraception while you\u2019re ill and for two days after recovering. Very severe diarrhoea (six to eight watery stools in 24 hours) may also mean that the pill doesn\u2019t work properly. Keep taking your pill as normal, but use additional contraception, such as condoms, while you have diarrhoea and for two days after recovering (seven days if you are taking a 12-hour pill). Speak to your GP or contraception nurse or call NHS 111 or the Sexual Health Line on 0300123 7123 if you are unsure whether you are protected against pregnancy, or if your sickness or diarrhoea continues. Who can use the progestogen-only pill? Most women can use the progestogen-only pill. You may not be able to use it if you have had: heart disease  liver disease  breast cancer  cysts on your ovaries unexplained vaginal bleeding If you are healthy and there are no medical reasons why you should not take the progestogen-only pill, you can take it until your menopause or until you are 55. Breastfeeding The progestogen-only pill is safe to use if you are breastfeeding. Small amounts of progestogen may pass into your breast milk, but this is not harmful to your baby. The progestogen-only pill does not affect the way your breast milk is produced. Pregnancy Although it is very unlikely, there is a very small chance that you could become pregnant while taking the progestogen-only pill. If this happens, there is no evidence that the pill will harm your unborn baby. If you think you may be pregnant, speak to your GP or visit your local contraception clinic. Get medical advice if you have a sudden or unusual pain in your abdomen (tummy), or if your period is much shorter or lighter than usual. It is possible that these are warning signs of an ectopic pregnancy, although this is rare. Advantages and disadvantages Some advantages of the progestogen-only pill include: it does not interrupt sex  you can use it when breastfeeding  it is useful if you cannot take the hormone oestrogen, which is in the combined pill, contraceptive patch and vaginal ring you can use it at any age \u2013 even if you smoke and are over 35 it can reduce the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and painful periods Some disadvantages of the progestogen-only pill include: you may not have regular periods while taking it \u2013 your periods may be lighter, more frequent or may stop altogether, and you may get spotting between periods it does not protect you against STIs you need to remember to take it at or around the same time every day  some medications, including certain types of antibiotic, can make it less effective The progestogen-only pill is generally well tolerated and side effects are rare. Some side effects can include:  acne  breast tenderness and breast enlargement  an increased or decreased sex drive  mood changes  headache and migraine nausea or vomiting  cysts (small fluid-filled sacs) on your ovaries (these are usually harmless and disappear without treatment)  stomach upset  weight gain These side effects are most likely to occur during the first few months of taking the progestogen-only pill, but they generally improve over time and should stop within a few months. If you have any concerns about your contraceptive pill, see your GP or practice nurse. They may advise you to change to another pill or a different form of contraception. The progestogen-only pill with other medicines When you take two or more medicines at the same time, the effects of one medicine can be changed by the other. This is known as an interaction. Some medicines interact with the progestogen-only pill and it doesn\u2019t work properly. Some interactions are listed on this page but it is not a complete list \u2013 if you want to check your medicines are safe to take with the progestogen-only pill, you can:  ask your GP, practice nurse or pharmacist read the patient information leaflet that comes with your medicine Antibiotics The antibiotics rifampicin and rifabutin (which can be used to treat illnesses including tuberculosis and meningitis) can reduce the effectiveness of the progestogen-only pill. Other antibiotics do not have this effect. If you are prescribed rifampicin or rifabutin, you may need additional contraception (such as condoms) while taking the antibiotic and for 28 days after. Speak to your doctor or nurse for advice. Epilepsy and HIV medicines, and St John\u2019s wort The progestogen-only pill can interact with medicines called enzyme inducers. These speed up the breakdown of progestogen by your liver, reducing the effectiveness of the progestogen-only pill. Examples of enzyme inducers are: the epilepsy drugs carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone and topiramate  St John\u2019s wort (a herbal remedy)  some antiretroviral medicines used to treat HIV (research suggests interactions between these medicines and the progestogen-only pill can affect the safety and effectiveness of both) Your GP or nurse may advise you to use an alternative or additional form of contraception while taking any of these medicines. Risks of taking the progestogen-only pill The progestogen-only pill is very safe to take. However, as with the combined contraceptive pill, there are certain risks. These risks are small. For most women, benefits of the progestogen-only pill outweigh the risks. Ovarian cysts Some women can develop fluid-filled cysts on their ovaries. These are not dangerous and do not usually need to be removed. These cysts usually disappear without treatment. In many cases, the cysts do not cause symptoms, although some women experience pelvic pain. Breast cancer Research is continuing into the link between breast cancer and the progestogen-only pill. Research suggests that women who use any type of hormonal contraception have a slightly higher chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer compared with people who don\u2019t use hormonal contraception. However, 10 years after you stop taking the pill, your risk of breast cancer goes back to normal. If you have a family history of breast cancer, you may feel that this increase in risk (however small it is) is not worth taking. However, doctors do not think that using the contraceptive pill is likely to increase the risk in women who already have close relatives with breast cancer. Where you can get the progestogen-only pill Most types of contraception are available for free in the UK. Contraception is free to all women and men through the NHS. Places where you can get contraception include: most GP surgeries \u2013 talk to your GP or practice nurse community contraception clinics  some genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinics  sexual health clinics \u2013 they also offer contraceptive and STI testing services  some young people\u2019s services (call 0300 123 7123 for more information) Find your nearest sexual health clinic by searching by postcode or town. Contraception services are free and confidential, including for people under the age of 16. If you're under 16 and want contraception, the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents (or carer) as long as they believe you fully understand the information you're given, and your decisions. Doctors and nurses work under strict guidelines when dealing with people under 16. They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents, but they won't make you. The only time that a professional might want to tell someone else is if they believe you're at risk of harm, such as abuse. The risk would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.  Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/12\/2014 Next review due: 29\/12\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 417 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 287  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Related articles Combined pill Will antibiotics affect my contraception? External links FPA: sexual health information Brook: for young people Which method suits me? Things to think about when you're considering which contraceptive method to use Before sex: what to ask your partner Advice on how to talk to a new partner about safer sex and your sexual history Taken an extra pill What to do if you've taken an extra contraceptive pill by accident Sexually transmitted infections Find out about the different types of infections you can catch from having unprotected sex or genital contact NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Progressive supranuclear palsy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Progressive-supranuclear-palsy","content":"Progressive supranuclear palsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Progressive supranuclear palsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Clinical trials Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Community Progressive supranuclear palsy Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Symptoms Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Diagnosis Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Treatment Introduction  Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare and progressive condition that can cause problems with balance, movement, vision, speech and swallowing. It's caused by increasing numbers of brain cells becoming damaged over time. The PSP Association estimates there are around 4,000 people with PSP living in the UK. However, it's thought that the true figure could be much higher, because many cases may be misdiagnosed. Most cases of PSP develop in people who are over 60 years of age. What causes PSP? PSP occurs when brain cells in certain parts of the brain are damaged as a result of a build-up of a protein called tau. Tau occurs naturally in the brain and is usually broken down before it reaches high levels. In people with PSP, it isn't broken down properly and forms harmful clumps in brain cells. The amount of abnormal tau in the brain can vary among people with PSP, as can the location of these clumps. This means the condition can have a wide range of symptoms. The condition has been linked to changes in certain genes, but these genetic faults are not inherited and the risk to other family members, including children or siblings of someone with PSP, is very low. PSP symptoms The symptoms of PSP usually get gradually worse over time. At first, the symptoms can be similar to some other conditions, which makes it difficult to diagnose early on. Some of the main symptoms of PSP include: problems with balance and mobility, including frequent falls changes in behaviour, such as irritability or apathy (lack of interest) muscle stiffness  an inability to control eye and eyelid movement, including focusing on specific objects or looking up or down at something slow, quiet or slurred speech difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) slowness of thought and some memory problems The rate at which the symptoms progress can vary widely from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of PSP. Diagnosing PSP There's no single test for PSP. Instead, the diagnosis is based on the pattern of your symptoms. Your doctor will try to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as Parkinson's disease. The large number of possible symptoms of PSP also makes it difficult to diagnose correctly and can mean it takes a while to get a definitive diagnosis. You may need to have a brain scan to look for other possible causes of your symptoms, as well as tests of your memory, concentration and ability to understand language. The diagnosis must be made or confirmed by a consultant with expertise in PSP. This will usually be a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves). Read more about how PSP is diagnosed. Treatments for PSP There's currently no cure for PSP, but research into new treatments that aim to relieve symptoms and prevent the condition getting worse is continuing. Treatment currently focuses on relieving the symptoms, while trying to ensure that someone with PSP has the best possible quality of life. As someone with PSP can be affected in many different ways, treatment and care is provided by a team of health and social care professionals working together. Treatment will be tailored to meet the needs of each individual: medication \u2013 to improve balance, stiffness and other symptoms physiotherapy \u2013 to help with movement and balance difficulties speech and language therapy \u2013 to help with speech or swallowing problems occupational therapy \u2013 to help improve the skills needed for daily activities botulinum toxin injections or special glasses \u2013 to help with eye problems feeding tubes \u2013 to help manage dysphagia and avoid malnutrition or dehydration Read more about how PSP is treated. Outlook Unfortunately, there's currently nothing that can be done to stop PSP gradually worsening, although research into new treatments gives hope that this may be possible in the future. Good care and assistance can help someone with PSP to be more independent and enjoy a better quality of life, but the condition will eventually put them at risk of serious complications. It\u2019s a good idea to talk to your doctor about what you\u2019d like to happen when the condition reaches this stage. Difficulty swallowing can cause choking, or inhaling food or liquid into the airways. This can lead to pneumonia, which can be life-threatening; however, help from a speech and language therapist at an early stage can lower this risk for as long as possible. As a result of these complications, the average life expectancy for someone with PSP is around six or seven years from when their symptoms start. However, it can be much longer, as the timespan varies from person to person. Information about you If you have PSP, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 07\/09\/2015 Next review due: 07\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 249 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support guide Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) End of life care Parkinson\u2019s disease External links PSP Association PSP Association: everyday living What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prolapse of the uterus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prolapse-of-the-uterus","content":"Pelvic organ prolapse - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pelvic organ prolapse  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prolapse-of-the-uterus Clinical trials Pelvic organ prolapse Prolapse-of-the-uterus Treatment Introduction  Pelvic organ prolapse is bulging of one or more of the pelvic organs into the vagina. These organs are the uterus, vagina, bowel and bladder. Symptoms may include: a sensation of a bulge or something coming down or out of the vagina, which sometimes needs to be pushed back discomfort during sex problems passing urine \u2013 such as slow stream, a feeling of not emptying the bladder fully, needing to urinate more often and leaking a small amount of urine when you cough, sneeze or exercise (stress incontinence) Some women with a pelvic organ prolapse don't have any symptoms and the condition is only discovered during an internal examination for another reason, such as a cervical screening. When to see your GP Pelvic organ prolapse isn't life-threatening, but it can affect your quality of life. See your GP if you have any of the symptoms of a prolapse, or if you notice a lump in or around your vagina. Internal pelvic examination Your doctor will need to carry out an internal pelvic examination. They'll ask you to undress from the waist down and lie back on the examination bed, while they feel for any lumps in your pelvic area. Some women may put off going to their GP if they're embarrassed or worried about what the doctor may find. However, the examination is important, only takes a few minutes and is similar to having a smear test. Further tests If you have bladder symptoms, such as needing to rush to the toilet or leaking when you cough and sneeze, further tests may need to be carried out in hospital. For example, a small tube (catheter) may be inserted into your bladder to examine your bladder function and identify any leakage problems. This test is known as urodynamics. Your doctor will decide if further tests are needed before treating the prolapse. Types of prolapse If pelvic organ prolapse is confirmed, it will usually be staged to indicate how severe it is. Most often, a number system is used, ranging from one to four, with four indicating a severe prolapse. Pelvic organ prolapse can affect the front, top or back of the vagina. The main types of prolapse are: anterior prolapse (cystocele) \u2013 where the bladder bulges into the front wall of the vagina prolapse of the uterus and cervix or top of the vagina \u2013 which can be the result of previous treatment to remove the womb (hysterectomy) posterior wall prolapse (rectocoele or enterocoele) \u2013 when the bowel bulges forward into the back wall of the vagina It's possible to have more than one of these types of prolapse at the same time. Why does prolapse happen? Prolapse is caused by weakening of tissues that support the pelvic organs. Although there's rarely a single cause, the risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse can be increased by: your age \u2013 prolapse is more common as you get older childbirth, particularly if you had a long or difficult labour, or gave birth to multiple babies or a large baby \u2013 up to half of all women who have had children are affected by some degree of prolapse changes caused by the menopause \u2013 such as weakening of tissue and low levels of the hormone oestrogen being overweight, obese or having large fibroids (non-cancerous tumours in or around the womb) or pelvic cysts \u2013 which creates extra pressure in the pelvic area previous pelvic surgery \u2013 such as a hysterectomy or bladder repair repeated heavy lifting and manual work long-term coughing or sneezing \u2013 for example, if you smoke, have a lung condition or allergy excessive straining when going to the toilet because of long-term constipation Certain conditions can also cause the tissues in your body to become weak, making a prolapse more likely, including: joint hypermobility syndrome \u2013 where your joints are very loose Marfan syndrome \u2013 an inherited condition that affects the blood vessels, eyes and skeleton Ehlers-Danlos syndrome \u2013 a group of inherited conditions that affect collagen proteins in the body Can a prolapse be prevented? There are several things you can do to reduce your risk of prolapse, including: doing regular pelvic floor exercises maintaining a healthy weight or losing weight if you're overweight eating a high-fibre diet with plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and wholegrain bread and cereal to avoid constipation and straining when going to the toilet avoiding heavy lifting If you smoke, stopping smoking may also help to reduce your risk of a prolapse. How is prolapse treated? Many women with prolapse don't need treatment, as the problem doesn't seriously interfere with their normal activities. Lifestyle changes such as weight loss and pelvic floor exercises are usually recommended in mild cases. If the symptoms require treatment, a prolapse may be treated effectively using a device inserted into the vagina, called a vaginal pessary. This helps to hold the prolapsed organ in place. Surgery may also be an option for some women. This usually involves giving support to the prolapsed organ. In some cases, complete removal of the womb (hysterectomy) is required, especially if the womb has prolapsed out. Most women experience a better quality of life after surgery, but there's a risk of problems remaining or even getting worse. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 05\/02\/2015 Next review due: 05\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1570 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 633  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 471  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 170  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) Hysterectomy Urinary incontinence Women's health 40-60 External links MHRA: safety of vaginal meshes for pelvic organ prolapse NICE: infracoccygeal sacropexy using mesh NICE: insertion of mesh uterine suspension sling NHS leaflet: what is a sacrospinous fixation? (PDF, 65Kb) NICE: sacrocolpopexy with hysterectomy using mesh Women's Health Concern: prolapse Women's health 40-60 Healthy living advice for women aged 40 to 60. Includes real stories on losing weight and alcohol dangers Your body after childbirth Having a baby changes your body. Here's how it may change and some exercises and techniques to help. Find and choose services for Prolapse of the uterus Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prolapsed disc","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/slipped-disc","content":"Slipped disc - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Slipped disc  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Slipped-disc Clinical trials Slipped disc Slipped-disc Symptoms Slipped-disc Causes Slipped-disc Diagnosis Slipped-disc Treatment Slipped-disc Prevention Introduction  A slipped disc \u2013 known as a prolapsed or herniated disc \u2013 occurs when one of the discs that sit between the bones of the spine (the vertebrae) is damaged and presses on the nerves. This can cause back pain and neck pain, as well as symptoms such as numbness, a tingling sensation, or weakness in other areas of the body. The sciatic nerve is often affected in cases of slipped disc. It is the longest nerve in the body and runs from the back of the pelvis, through the buttocks and down both legs to the feet. If pressure is placed on the sciatic nerve (sciatica), it can cause mild to severe pain in the leg, hip or buttocks. Read more about the symptoms of a slipped disc. The spine The spine consists of 24 individual bones called vertebrae that are stacked on top of each other. In between each vertebra there are protective circular pads of cartilage (connective tissue) called discs, which have a tough, fibrous case that contains a softer gel-like substance. The discs help maintain your back's flexibility and wide range of movement. The spinal cord is highly sensitive and passes through the middle of the vertebral column. It contains nerve cells and bundles of nerve fibres that connect all parts of the body to the brain. What causes a slipped disc? A slipped disc occurs when the outer case of the disc splits, resulting in the gel inside bulging out of the disc. The damaged disc can put pressure on the whole spinal cord or on a single nerve root (where a nerve leaves the spinal cord). This means a slipped disc can cause pain both in the area of the protruding disc and in the area of the body controlled by the nerve that the disc is pressing on. It is not always clear what causes a disc to break down, although age is a common factor in many cases. As you get older, your spinal discs start to lose their water content, making them less flexible and more likely to rupture. Smoking also plays a role as it causes the discs to lose their natural flexibility. It's important to note not all slipped discs cause symptoms such as pain, weakness or tingling. Many people will go their whole life and not know they have a slipped disc, even though they have one. Read more about what causes a slipped disc. Diagnosing a slipped disc Your GP will usually be able to diagnose a slipped disc from your symptoms and medical history. They may also carry out a physical examination to test your: posture reflexes muscle strength walking ability sensation in your limbs Read more about how a slipped disc is diagnosed. Treating a slipped disc It can take about four to six weeks to recover from a slipped disc. Treatment usually involves a combination of physical therapy, such as massage and exercise, and medication to relieve the pain. Surgery to release the compressed nerve and remove part of the disc may be considered in severe cases, or if the pain continues for longer than six weeks. In many cases, a slipped disc will eventually shrink back away from the nerve and the pain will ease as the disc stops pressing on the affected nerve. Often the slipped disc will stay pressing on the nerve, but the pain goes away because the brain learns to \"turn down the volume\" on the pain messages coming from the nerve. If you have a slipped disc, it is very important to keep active. Initially moving may be difficult, but after resting for a couple of days you should start to move around.  This will help keep your back mobile and stop the joints becoming stiff and the muscles that support the spine becoming weak. Keeping moving will speed up your recovery. Any exercise you do should be gentle and not put too much strain on your back. Exercises that involve high impact, such as running, jumping or twisting, should be avoided at first as they may cause a flare-up of the pain. Read more about treating a slipped disc. Preventing a slipped disc Taking a few sensible precautions, such as leading a healthy lifestyle, can help prevent back pain and lower your risk of getting a slipped disc. For example, you should: take regular exercise use a safe technique when lifting heavy objects always maintain a good posture when sitting and standing quit smoking if you smoke Read more about preventing a slipped disc. Lumbar spine illustration 1. Healthy disc 2. Nerve 3. Slipped disc 4. Damaged disc 5. Spinal cord How common are slipped discs? Slipped discs are most common in people aged between 30 and 50 years old. The condition affects twice as many men as women. Slipped discs often occur in the lower back. While around a third of adults in the UK have lower back pain, fewer than 1 in 20 people have a slipped disc. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 01\/08\/2014 Next review due: 01\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 824 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 420  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 211  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 68  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 87  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Back pain Back pain guide Chiropractic Lumbar surgery Neck pain Osteopathy Physiotherapy Sciatica External links Arthritis Research UK: back pain Back Pain British Chiropractic Association General Osteopathic Council Pain Concern The Pain Toolkit Exercises for sciatica: slipped disc In this video physiotherapist Sammy Margo demonstrates gentle exercises for sciatica caused by a herniated or slipped disc Back pain guide Explore this guide for information about different types of back pain and how you can prevent it, plus advice on treatment Find and choose services for Slipped disc Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Proptosis (bulging eyes)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Exophthalmos","content":"Exophthalmos (bulging eyes) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Exophthalmos (bulging eyes)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Exophthalmos Clinical trials Exophthalmos Exophthalmos Treatment Introduction  Exophthalmos is a medical term for a bulging or protruding eyeball or eyeballs. It is often used interchangeably with the term \"proptosis\", which means the same thing. What causes exophthalmos? Exophthalmos can be caused by many different conditions. It's important that the underlying cause is identified so appropriate treatment can be given. Thyroid eye disease One of the main causes of exophthalmos in the UK is thyroid eye disease, also known as Graves' ophthalmopathy. This is an autoimmune condition that affects around one in every three people with an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) caused by Graves' disease. It is particularly common in women who are 30-50 years of age and people who smoke. An autoimmune condition is where the immune system (the body's defence against illness and infection) mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. In the case of thyroid eye disease, the immune system attacks the muscles and fatty tissues around and behind the eye, causing them to become inflamed (swollen). Graves' disease is an autoimmune condition in which the thyroid is attacked, leading to an increase in the level of thyroid hormones in your blood. It's not clear exactly why thyroid eye disease sometimes occurs along with this condition. Thyroid eye disease can also occasionally affect people with an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) and, in rare cases, people with seemingly normal thyroid function. Other causes Exophthalmos can also have a number of other causes, but these are generally less common than thyroid eye disease. Other cause of exophthalmos can include: an injury to the eyes bleeding behind the eyes abnormally shaped blood vessels behind the eyes an infection of the tissue in the eye socket cancerous tumours \u2013 such as those caused by neuroblastoma and some soft tissue sarcomas Exophthalmos can also affect newborn babies if they are born with eye sockets that are shallower than normal. Other problems associated with exophthalmos Depending on what is causing your bulging eyes, you may also have other associated symptoms. For example, if exophthalmos is caused by a thyroid eye disease, your eyes may also be: inflamed, red and painful dry and \"gritty\" tearful sensitive to light (photophobia) You may also experience some double vision. In severe cases of exophthalmos, you may not be able to close your eyes properly. This can damage your corneas (the transparent tissue that covers the front of your eye) by causing them to dry out. If your corneas become very dry, an infection or ulcers (open sores) may develop. These could damage your vision if left untreated. There is also a small risk of the optic nerve (which transmits signals from the eye to the brain) becoming compressed if you have exophthalmos, which may affect your sight permanently if it is not treated quickly. Seeking medical advice It's important to see your GP or an optometrist (optician) if you notice that one or both of your eyes are protruding, as treatment is often more effective if it's started as soon as possible. If necessary, your GP or optometrist can refer you to an ophthalmologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating eye conditions) for further assessment. The ophthalmologist will check how well you are able to move your eyes. They may also use an instrument called an exophthalmometer to measure how far your eyeball protrudes. If the ophthalmologist wants to examine your eye socket in more detail, a computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan may be carried out. You may also have a blood test to assess how well your thyroid gland is working, and you may be referred for an assessment by an endocrinologist (a specialist in conditions affecting glands and hormones) if you are found to have abnormal thyroid hormone levels. Treating exophthalmos If exophthalmos is being caused by thyroid eye disease, the following treatments are often helpful: medication to correct the level of thyroid hormones in your blood \u2013 this will not necessarily improve the problems with your eyes, but may stop them getting worse corticosteroid medication given directly into a vein (intravenously) \u2013 this can help reduce the inflammation associated with the condition corrective surgery \u2013 this may be carried out to improve the appearance of your eyes once the inflammation is under control Other useful measures include stopping smoking, using artificial tears to reduce eye dryness and irritation, and wearing special lenses to correct double vision. In other cases, treatment will vary depending on the underlying cause of the condition. For example, treatments such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy and\/or surgery may be recommended if exophthalmos is caused by a tumour. Read more about treating exophthalmos. Outlook The outlook for exophthalmos can vary considerably. Many of the symptoms of thyroid eye disease tend to improve over time, although this can take a number of years, and there is a chance your eyes will continue to protrude if corrective surgery is not carried out. Some people with exophthalmos are left with long-term vision problems, such as double vision, but permanent visual impairment is rare if the condition is identified and treated promptly. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2014 Next review due: 02\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 37 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Double vision Dry eyes Eye health Eyelid problems Overactive thyroid Red eye Underactive thyroid External links British Thyroid Association British Thyroid Foundation Eyecare Trust: thyroid eye disease RNIB: thyroid eye disease Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Overactive thyroid Overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism, is a relatively common condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prosopagnosia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/prosopagnosia","content":"Prosopagnosia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prosopagnosia (face blindness)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Prosopagnosia, also known as \"face blindness\", is the inability to recognise faces. Face blindness often affects people from birth and is usually a problem a person has for most or all of their life. It can have a severe impact on everyday life (see below). Many people with prosopagnosia aren't able to recognise family members, partners or friends. They may cope by using alternative strategies to recognise people, such as remembering the way they walk, or their hairstyle, voice or clothing. But these types of compensation strategies don't always work, particularly when a person with prosopagnosia meets someone out of context, at a place or time they're not used to seeing that person. The impact of prosopagnosia A person with prosopagnosia may avoid social interaction and develop social anxiety disorder (an overwhelming fear of social situations). They may also have difficulty forming relationships or experience problems with their career. Episodes of depression aren't uncommon. Some people with prosopagnosia are unable to recognise certain facial expressions, judge a person's age or gender, or follow a person's gaze. Others may not even recognise their own face in the mirror or in photos. Prosopagnosia can affect a person's ability to recognise objects, such as places or cars. Many people also have difficulty navigating. This can involve an inability to process angles or distance, or problems remembering places and landmarks.  Following the plot of films or television programmes can be almost impossible for someone with prosopagnosia because characters aren't recognisable. Someone with prosopagnosia may worry that they appear rude or disinterested when they fail to recognise a person.  What causes prosopagnosia? There are two types of prosopagnosia known as: developmental prosopagnosia \u2013 where a person has prosopagnosia without having brain damage acquired prosopagnosia \u2013 where a person develops prosopagnosia after sustaining damage to their brain, often following a stroke or a head injury In the past, most cases of prosopagnosia were thought to occur following a brain injury (acquired prosopagnosia). But research has found that many more people have prosopagnosia without having brain damage (developmental prosopagnosia) than was first thought. Developmental prosopagnosia A number of studies have indicated that as many as one in 50 people may have developmental prosopagnosia, which equates to about 1.5 million people in the UK. Most people with developmental prosopagnosia simply fail to develop the ability to recognise faces. Someone born with the condition may not realise they have a problem. Developmental prosopagnosia may have a genetic component and run in families. Many people with the condition have reported at least one first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling (brother or sister) who also has problems recognising faces. Acquired prosopagnosia Acquired prosopagnosia is rare. When someone acquires prosopagnosia after a brain injury, they'll quickly notice that they've lost the ability to recognise people they know. But if prosopagnosia occurs after brain damage in early childhood, before the child has fully developed the ability to recognise faces, they may grow up not realising they're unable to recognise faces as well as other people can. Prosopagnosia isn't related to memory problems, vision loss or learning disabilities, but it's sometimes associated with other developmental disorders, such as autistic spectrum disorder, Turner syndrome and Williams syndrome. Diagnosing prosopagnosia If you have problems recognising faces, your GP may refer you to a clinical neuropsychologist working within the NHS or private practice. You may also be referred to a researcher who specialises in the field and is based at a nearby university. You'll have an assessment involving a range of tests that assess your face recognition ability, among other skills. For example, you may be asked to: memorise and later recognise faces you've never seen before recognise famous faces spot similarities and differences between faces presented next to each other judge age, gender or emotional expression from a set of faces If you live within travelling distance of Bournemouth University, the Centre for Face Processing Disorders may be able to offer you a formal testing session and the opportunity to take part in their research programme. Treating prosopagnosia There's no specific treatment for prosopagnosia, but researchers are continuing to investigate what causes the condition, and training programmes are being developed to help improve facial recognition. It's thought that compensatory strategies that help with person recognition, or techniques that attempt to restore normal face-processing mechanisms, may work for some people with either developmental or acquired prosopagnosia. A person's age when their brain was damaged (in the case of acquired prosopagnosia), the type and severity of the brain injury, and the timing of treatment, are all thought to be important factors in relation to how effective a rehabilitation programme will be. Many people with prosopagnosia develop compensatory strategies to help them recognise people, such as recognising a person's voice, clothing or gait (the way they walk). However, compensatory strategies based on contextual cues don't always work, and may break down when a person with prosopagnosia meets someone they know in an unexpected location or who's changed their appearance. Headway has produced a factsheet called Prosopagnosia \u2013 face blindness after brain injury (PDF, 404kb). It has some useful information about living with the condition, including social, observational, memory and navigation strategies, plus tips for watching TV and films. Does my child have prosopagnosia? It can be difficult to recognise prosopagnosia in children, but the following are potential signs: your child frequently fails to recognise familiar people when encountering them unexpectedly they're particularly clingy in public places they wait for you to wave when you're collecting them from school, or approach strangers thinking they're you they're socially withdrawn at school and have difficulty making friends (this may be in contrast to more confident behaviour at home, when recognition isn't an issue) they find it difficult to follow plots of films or TV shows The Centre for Face Processing Disorders, based at Bournemouth University, has more information about prosopagnosia in children. Page last reviewed: 02\/06\/2016 Next review due: 02\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 52 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Severe head injury Social anxiety disorder Stroke External links Centre for Face Processing Disorders: prosopagnosia Prosopagnosia Research Centers (US) troublewithfaces.org: face recognition difficulties troublewithfaces.org: prosopagnosia test Social anxiety disorder Social anxiety disorder, or social phobia, is a persistent and overwhelming fear of social situations, which may cause embarrassment NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prostate cancer","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Cancer-of-the-prostate","content":"Prostate cancer - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prostate cancer  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Cancer-of-the-prostate Clinical trials Cancer-of-the-prostate Community Prostate cancer Cancer-of-the-prostate Symptoms Cancer-of-the-prostate Causes Cancer-of-the-prostate Diagnosis Cancer-of-the-prostate PSA testing Cancer-of-the-prostate Treatment Cancer-of-the-prostate Living with Introduction  Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the UK, with over 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. Prostate cancer usually develops slowly, so there may be no signs you have it for many years. Symptoms often only become apparent when your prostate is large enough to affect the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). When this happens, you may notice things like an increased need to urinate, straining while urinating and a feeling that your bladder has not fully emptied. These symptoms shouldn\u2019t be ignored, but they do not mean you definitely have prostate cancer. It is more likely that they are caused by something else, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (also known as BPH or prostate enlargement). Read more about the symptoms of prostate cancer. What is the prostate? The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis found only in men. About the size of a satsuma, it's located between the penis and the bladder and surrounds the urethra. The main function of the prostate is to help in the production of semen. It produces a thick white fluid that is mixed with the sperm produced by the testicles, to create semen. Why does prostate cancer happen? The causes of prostate cancer are largely unknown. However, certain things can increase your risk of developing the condition. The chances of developing prostate cancer increase as you get older. Most cases develop in men aged 50 or older. For reasons not yet understood, prostate cancer is more common in men of African-Caribbean or African descent, and less common in men of Asian descent. Men who have first degree male relatives (such as a father or brother) affected by prostate cancer are also at slightly increased risk. Read more about the causes of prostate cancer. Tests for prostate cancer There is no single test for prostate cancer. All the tests used to help diagnose the condition have benefits and risks, which your doctor should discuss with you. The most commonly used tests for prostate cancer are blood tests, a physical examination of your prostate (known as a digital rectal examination or DRE) and a biopsy. The blood test, known as a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, measures the level of PSA and may help detect early prostate cancer. Men are not routinely offered PSA tests to screen for prostate cancer, as results can be unreliable. This is because the PSA blood test is not specific to prostate cancer. PSA can be raised due to a large non-cancerous growth of the prostate (BPH), a urinary tract infection or inflammation of the prostate, as well as prostate cancer. Raised PSA levels also cannot tell a doctor whether a man has life-threatening prostate cancer or not. This means a raised PSA can lead to unnecessary tests and treatment. However, you can ask to be tested for prostate cancer once the benefits and risks have been explained to you. Read more about diagnosing prostate cancer and PSA screening for prostate cancer. How is prostate cancer treated? For many men with prostate cancer, treatment is not immediately necessary. If the cancer is at an early stage and not causing symptoms, a policy of \"watchful waiting\" or \"active surveillance\" may be adopted. This involves carefully monitoring your condition. Some cases of prostate cancer can be cured if treated in the early stages. Treatments include surgically removing the prostate, radiotherapy and hormone therapy. Some cases are only diagnosed at a later stage when the cancer has spread. If the cancer spreads to other parts of the body, typically the bones, it cannot be cured and treatment is focused on prolonging life and relieving symptoms. All treatment options carry the risk of significant side effects, including erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence. For this reason, many men choose to delay treatment until there is a risk the cancer might spread. Newer treatments, such as high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) or cryotherapy, aim to reduce these side effects. Some hospitals may offer them as an alternative to surgery, radiotherapy or hormone therapy. However, the long-term effectiveness of these treatments are not yet known. Read more about treating prostate cancer. Living with prostate cancer As prostate cancer usually progresses very slowly, you can live for decades without symptoms or needing treatment. Nevertheless, it can have an effect on your life. As well as causing physical problems such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, a diagnosis of prostate cancer can understandably make you feel anxious or depressed. You may find it beneficial to talk about the condition with your family, friends, a family doctor and other men with prostate cancer. Financial support is also available if prostate cancer reduces your ability to work. Read more about living with prostate cancer. Page last reviewed: 03\/01\/2015 Next review due: 03\/01\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 908 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 362  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 288  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 81  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 121  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cancer community Care and support End of life issues for carers Prostate enlargement Prostate health Find cancer support services External links Cancer Research UK: prostate cancer healthtalk.org: real stories Lab Tests Online UK: PSA test Localised Prostate Cancer Decision Aid Malecare My Cancer Treatment: local NHS services NHS Prostate Risk Management Scheme Prostate Cancer UK Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Testing Decision Aid Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Community content from HealthUnlocked Find and choose services for Prostate cancer Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prostate problems","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prostate-disease","content":"Prostate problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prostate problems  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prostate-disease Clinical trials Prostate problems Introduction  Prostate problems are common in men, particularly in those over 50 years of age. On this page, you can read about what the prostate is and the main problems that affect it, which are: prostate enlargement prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate) prostate cancer Below is a summary of these conditions, plus links to more detailed information about them. About the prostate gland The prostate is a small gland found only in men. It surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the body). It sits just below the bladder and the opening of the vas deferens (tube that carries sperm up from the testicles to the urethra). The prostate gland produces a thick, white fluid that's mixed with sperm to create semen. The prostate gland is about the size and shape of a walnut, but tends to get bigger as you get older. It can sometimes become swollen or enlarged because of medical conditions such as those outlined below. Prostate enlargement Prostate enlargement is a very common condition associated with ageing. Over a third of all men over 50 years of age will have some symptoms of prostate enlargement. It's not known why the prostate gets bigger as you get older, but it isn't caused by cancer and it doesn't increase your risk of developing prostate cancer. An enlarged prostate can put pressure on the urethra (see above), which can affect how you urinate. Signs of an enlarged prostate can include: difficulty starting or stopping urinating a weak flow of urine straining when peeing feeling like you're not able to fully empty your bladder prolonged dribbling after you've finished peeing needing to pee more frequently or more suddenly waking up frequently during the night to pee  See your GP if you notice any problems with, or changes to, your usual pattern of urination. Simple measures such as reducing the amount you drink (especially tea, coffee and alcohol) before bed can sometimes help control the symptoms. Medication can help reduce the size of your prostate and relax the muscles of your bladder. In severe cases that don't get better with medication, the inner part of the prostate can be surgically removed. Read more about prostate enlargement. Prostatitis Prostatitis is where the prostate gland becomes inflamed (swollen). It's sometimes caused by a bacterial infection, although more often no infection can be found and it's not clear why it happened. Unlike prostate enlargement or prostate cancer \u2013 which usually affect older men \u2013 prostatitis can develop in men of all ages. However, it's generally more common in men between 30 and 50 years of age. Symptoms of prostatitis can include: pain in the pelvis, genitals, lower back and buttocks pain when urinating a frequent need to pee difficulty urinating, such as problems starting to pee pain when ejaculating pain in the perineum (the area between the anus and scrotum), which is often made worse by prolonged sitting See your GP if you have these symptoms. Prostatitis can be treated using a combination of painkillers and a type of medication known as an alpha-blocker, which can help to relax the muscles of the prostate and bladder neck. Medication that shrinks the prostate gland may also be helpful. Most men will recover within a few weeks or months, although some will continue to have symptoms for longer. Read more about prostatitis. Prostate cancer In the UK, prostate cancer is the most common type of cancer in men, with over 40,000 new cases diagnosed every year. It's not clear why it occurs, but your chances of developing prostate cancer increase as you get older. The condition mainly affects men over 65, although men over 50 are also at risk. The risk of developing prostate cancer is also increased in men who have a first-degree relative (dad or brother) with prostate cancer and in men of Afro-Caribbean origin. The symptoms of prostate cancer can be difficult to distinguish from those of prostate enlargement (see above). They may include: needing to pee more frequently (often during the night) needing to rush to the toilet difficulty starting to urinate straining or taking a long time while peeing weak flow  a feeling that your bladder hasn't emptied fully You should see your GP if you have these symptoms. It's much more likely to be prostate enlargement, but it\u2019s important to rule out cancer. The outlook for prostate cancer is generally good because, unlike many other types of cancer, it usually progresses very slowly. Many men die with prostate cancer, rather than as a result of having it. Prostate cancer therefore doesn\u2019t always need to be treated immediately. Sometimes it may just be monitored at first and only treated if it gets worse. Read more about prostate cancer. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 29\/07\/2015 Next review due: 29\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 663 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 316  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 213  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 74  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prostatitis Prostate cancer Prostate enlargement Prostate health External links BAUS: prostate symptoms Prostate Cancer UK: prostate problems Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Q&A: prostate cancer Answers to frequently asked questions on prostate cancer, including side effects, different kinds of testing, high-risk groups and screening NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prostate enlargement","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prostate-enlargement","content":"Benign prostate enlargement - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Benign prostate enlargement  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prostate-enlargement Clinical trials Benign prostate enlargement Prostate-enlargement Symptoms Prostate-enlargement Causes Prostate-enlargement Diagnosis Prostate-enlargement Treatment Prostate-enlargement Complications Introduction  Benign prostate enlargement (BPE), also known as benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), is a condition that affects older men. It's particularly common in men over 50 years of age and isn't usually a serious threat to health. Prostate gland The prostate is a small gland found only in men, located in the pelvis, between the penis and bladder. It's involved in the production of semen. The prostate produces a thick, white fluid that's made into a thinner liquid by a protein called prostate-specific antigen (PSA). The liquid is then mixed with sperm, produced by the testicles, to create semen. If the prostate becomes enlarged, it can place pressure on the bladder and urethra (the tube through which urine passes). This can affect how you pass urine and may cause: difficulty starting urination a frequent need to urinate difficulty fully emptying the bladder In some men, the symptoms are mild and don't require treatment. In others, the symptoms can be very troublesome and have a major impact on a person's quality of life. Read more about the symptoms of benign prostate enlargement. Many men worry that having an enlarged prostate means they have an increased risk of developing prostate cancer. This isn't the case. The risk of prostate cancer is no greater for men with an enlarged prostate than it is for men without an enlarged prostate. What causes benign prostate enlargement? The cause of prostate enlargement is unknown, but most experts agree that it's linked to hormonal changes that occur as a man gets older. Read more about the causes of benign prostate enlargement. How is benign prostate enlargement diagnosed? If your GP suspects that you have an enlarged prostate, you'll be asked to complete a questionnaire to assess your symptoms. Each question has five possible answers that carry a score, and your overall score indicates the severity of your symptoms. Your GP will also want to rule out other conditions that cause similar symptoms to prostate enlargement.  You may have a number of standard tests, such as urine tests, plus some more specific tests, such as a blood test that measures PSA. Read more about diagnosing benign prostate enlargement. Treating benign prostate enlargement Treatment for an enlarged prostate is determined by the severity of your symptoms. If you have mild to moderate symptoms, you won't receive any immediate medical treatment, but you'll have regular check-ups to carefully monitor your prostate. You'll probably also be advised to make lifestyle changes, such as limiting your caffeine and alcohol intake, and exercising regularly, to see if they improve your symptoms. As well as lifestyle changes, medication is usually recommended to treat moderate to severe symptoms of benign prostate enlargement. Finasteride and dutasteride are medications that are commonly used. They block the effects of a hormone called dihydrotestosterone (DHT) on the prostate gland, which can reduce the size of the prostate and improve associated symptoms. Alpha blockers may also be prescribed. They help to relax your bladder muscles, making it easier to pass urine. Tamsulosin and alfuzosin are two alpha blockers commonly used to treat benign prostate enlargement. Surgery is usually only recommended for moderate to severe symptoms of benign prostate enlargement that have failed to respond to medication. Read more about treating benign prostate enlargement. Complications of benign prostate enlargement Benign prostate enlargement can sometimes lead to complications such as a urinary tract infection (UTI) or acute urinary retention. Serious complications are rare. Read more about the complications of benign prostate enlargement. How common is benign prostate enlargement? Benign prostate enlargement is a condition associated with ageing and is common in men over 50 years of age. Around 4 out of 10 men (40%) over 50, and 3 out of 4 men (75%) in their 70s have urinary symptoms caused by an enlarged prostate. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 03\/03\/2015 Next review due: 03\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1268 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 670  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 371  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 56  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 130  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prostate cancer Prostate health Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) Urinary tract infections in adults External links Cancer Research UK: prostate cancer National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): management of lower urinary tract symptoms in men Prostate Cancer UK: prostate information Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prostatitis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Prostatitis","content":"Prostatitis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Prostatitis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Prostatitis Clinical trials Prostatitis Introduction  Prostatitis is the inflammation (swelling) of the prostate gland. It can be very painful and distressing, but will usually get better eventually. The prostate is a small gland found in men that lies between the penis and the bladder. It produces a thick white fluid that's mixed with sperm to create semen. Unlike other prostate conditions such as prostate enlargement or prostate cancer, which usually affect older men, prostatitis can develop in men of all ages. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of prostatitis can include: pain in the pelvis, genitals, lower back and buttocks pain when urinating a frequent need to pee difficulty urinating, such as problems starting or \"stop-start\" peeing pain when ejaculating, which may contribute to erectile dysfunction or loss of libido (sex drive) Sometimes you may also experience tiredness, aching joints and muscles, chills, and a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above. These symptoms usually develop gradually and come and go over several months, but they can sometimes start suddenly. When to seek medical advice See your GP if you have symptoms of prostatitis. Your GP will ask about the problems you're having and may examine your tummy. It's likely you'll also need a rectal examination, where they insert a finger into your bottom to feel if the prostate is swollen. Your urine will usually be tested for signs of infection, and you may be referred to a specialist for further tests to rule out other conditions. See your GP immediately if you develop sudden and severe symptoms of prostatitis. You may have acute prostatitis, which needs to be assessed and treated promptly because it can cause serious problems, such as suddenly not being able to pass urine (acute urinary retention). What causes prostatitis? There are two main types of prostatitis: chronic prostatitis \u2013 the symptoms come and go over a period of several months; this is the most common type acute prostatitis \u2013 the symptoms are severe and develop suddenly; this is rare, but can be serious and requires immediate treatment  Acute prostatitis is usually caused by bacteria in the urinary tract (the kidneys, bladder, and the tubes that connect them) entering the prostate. In chronic prostatitis, doctors can't usually find any infection in the prostate gland. The cause of symptoms in these cases is not clear. Treating prostatitis Treatment for chronic prostatitis usually aims to control the symptoms. Painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen may help relieve your pain. A medication called an alpha-blocker (such as tamsulosin) may also be prescribed if you have problems with urination, as these can help relax the muscles in the prostate gland and the base of the bladder. Occasionally, a four- to six-week course of antibiotics (such as ciprofloxacin) may be prescribed even if no infection is found. This is to see if your condition improves. For severe symptoms, the use of other painkillers, such as amitriptyline and gabapentin, may need to be considered. The aim is to reduce symptoms to a level where they interfere less with day-to-day activities, rather than getting rid of the pain completely. A referral to the local pain clinic may also be considered. Acute prostatitis is usually treated with painkillers and a two- to four-week course of antibiotics. In some cases, you may need to be treated in hospital if you are very ill or are unable to pass urine (acute urinary retention). Outlook Chronic prostatitis can be challenging to treat, as little is known about the cause of the condition. Most men will gradually recover with treatment, but this can take several months or years. Most men with acute prostatitis will make a full recovery within a few weeks, although around 1 in every 10 will go on to develop chronic prostatitis at some point in the future. Some men with prostatitis find their symptoms return (relapse) later on, which will require further treatment. Prostatitis is not cancer and there's currently no clear evidence that it increases your chances of developing prostate cancer. Page last reviewed: 24\/02\/2015 Next review due: 24\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 708 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 349  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 215  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 45  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful   Useful links NHS Choices links Know your prostate Prostate cancer Prostate enlargement External links Prostate Cancer UK: prostatitis Know your prostate What is the prostate gland and what does it do? Find out how it can go wrong and whether you're at risk of prostate cancer NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Transurethral resection of the prostate","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Resectionoftheprostate","content":"Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Transurethral resection of the prostate resectionoftheprostate How it's performed resectionoftheprostate Recovery resectionoftheprostate Risks resectionoftheprostate Alternatives Introduction  A transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is a surgical procedure that involves cutting away a section of the prostate. The prostate is a small gland in the pelvis only found in men. It's located between the penis and bladder, and surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the penis). If the prostate becomes enlarged, it can place pressure on the bladder and urethra. This can cause symptoms that affect urination. Why TURP is carried out TURP is often recommended when prostate enlargement (benign prostatic hyperplasia) causes troublesome symptoms and fails to respond to treatment with medication. Symptoms that may improve after TURP include: problems starting to urinate a weak urine flow or stopping and starting having to strain to pass urine a frequent need to urinate waking up frequently during the night to urinate (nocturia) a sudden urge to urinate being unable to empty your bladder fully How TURP is performed TURP is carried out using a device called a resectoscope, which is a thin metal tube containing a light, camera and loop of wire. This is passed along your urethra until it reaches your prostate, which means no cuts (incisions) need to be made in your skin. The loop of wire is then heated with an electric current and is used to cut away the section of your prostate that is causing your symptoms. A thin tube called a catheter is then inserted into your urethra to pump fluid into the bladder and flush away pieces of prostate that have been removed. General or spinal anaesthesia is used during the procedure so you don't feel any pain while it's carried out. Read more about how TURP is performed. Recovering from TURP You'll usually need to stay in hospital for one to three days after your operation. The catheter used during the operation will be left in place while you're in hospital because your urethra will be swollen and you may not be able to urinate normally at first. It's common to feel tired and under the weather for a week or two after going home. Most men are up and about after this time, but you'll need to take things easy for four to eight weeks. You'll usually be advised to stay off work and avoid lifting heavy objects, doing strenuous exercise, driving and having sex for at least a few weeks. It's normal to have some difficulties urinating and some blood in your urine for a few weeks. These problems should get better as you recover, but you should contact the hospital clinic or your GP if you're concerned. Read more about recovering from TURP. What are the risks? In most cases, TURP is a safe procedure and the risk of serious complications is very small. However, many men who have a TURP lose the ability to ejaculate semen during sex or masturbation, although they still have the physical pleasure associated with ejaculation (orgasm). This is known as retrograde ejaculation. Many men also temporarily lose the ability to control their bladder (urinary incontinence), although this usually passes in a few weeks. In rare cases, it may be persistent and need further treatment. There's also a small risk of problems such as erectile dysfunction, difficulties passing urine and urinary tract infections (UTIs). Read more detailed information about the risks of TURP. Alternatives to TURP There are a number of alternatives to TURP that can be just as effective with a lower risk of complications. They include: holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) \u2013 a laser attached to a resectoscope is used to cut away excess prostate tissue  transurethral laser resection or vaporisation of the prostate \u2013 a thin tube called a cystoscope is inserted into the urethra and a laser attached to the cystoscope fires pulses of energy to burn away prostate tissue However, these procedures aren't suitable for all men with prostate enlargement and may not be widely available. They may be more suitable for men with very large prostates, older men who are not fit enough to have TURP, and those using blood-thinning medication such as warfarin. Read more about the alternatives to TURP. Page last reviewed: 08\/06\/2015 Next review due: 08\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 310 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 175  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Prostate enlargement animation Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Prostate enlargement or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older men. This animation explains what the prostate gland is and how it functions. It also highlights the importance of seeing your GP to check for prostate cancer. Media last reviewed: 22\/01\/2016 Next review due: 22\/01\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Prostate health Prostate enlargement Urinary incontinence External links British Association of Urological Surgeons: prostate procedures NICE: TURis system Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it Having an operation If your GP has suggested you may need surgery, this guide is for you NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Protein C, Protein S or antithrombin deficiency","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thrombophilia","content":"Thrombophilia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thrombophilia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrombophilia Introduction  Thrombophilia is where the blood has an increased tendency to form clots. It's not a condition or a disorder itself, and is sometimes associated with blood clots (venous thromboses) that are caused by genetic changes (mutations). If you have thrombophilia, you're more likely to develop a blood clot in one of the large veins in your leg. This is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT).  It's important to be aware of the signs of a DVT, such as unexplained pain, swelling or tenderness in your leg (usually in your calf). See your GP as soon as possible if you have these symptoms (see below). The blood clotting process When you cut yourself, the bleeding usually triggers a number of chemical reactions in the blood. The chemical reactions cause a blood clot to form, which sticks to the injured part of the blood vessel along with blood cells called platelets. Clotting substances, known as clotting factors, help control bleeding and work with platelets to ensure the blood clots effectively. However, in thrombophilia, there's an imbalance in clotting chemicals and a person with the disorder either has too much clotting factor, or too little of the substance that prevents clotting. Types of thrombophilia There are many different types of thrombophilia. Some of the main types are outlined below. Factor V Leiden Factor V Leiden is a type of thrombophilia caused by a specific gene mutation. It's the most common type of inherited thrombophilia, with 3-8% of Europeans having one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation in each cell, and about one in 5,000 people having two copies of the mutation. It's less common in other populations. If you have Factor V Leiden, your risk of developing a DVT is increased (see above). There's also a higher risk of blood clots breaking away from their original location and travelling to other areas of your body through your bloodstream. This can be particularly serious if the blood clot becomes stuck in the main artery of your lungs (the pulmonary artery). This is known as a pulmonary embolism and it can be life-threatening (see below). Prothrombin 20210 mutation Prothrombin 20210 mutation, also known as Factor II mutation, is another genetic blood disorder that increases the risk of clots. Prothrombin is a protein in the blood which helps it to clot (thicken). However, in some people, a mutation in the gene that produces prothrombin causes too much to be produced, resulting in an increased tendency for blood clots, such as DVTs, to form. As with Factor V Leiden, prothrombin 20210 is more common in white people, particularly Europeans. Protein C, protein S or antithrombin deficiency Protein C, protein S, and antithrombin are natural anticoagulants (substances that prevent the blood from clotting). If you have low levels of these anticoagulants, or if they don't work properly, your risk of developing a DVT or pulmonary embolism is increased. Problems with protein C, protein S or antithrombin can be inherited but are rare. Antiphospholipid syndrome Antiphospholipid syndrome, also known as Hughes syndrome, is an immune system disorder that increases the risk of blood clots. Your body produces antibodies that attack phospholipids, a fat molecule thought to keep blood at the right consistency. The antibodies bind to the phospholipids, increasing your risk of a blood clot developing in a vein or artery. Symptoms of thrombophilia Thrombophilia is often mild and many people don't experience any health problems. Symptoms will only occur if the disorder causes a blood clot. People with thrombophilia are particularly at risk of developing a DVT.  Warning signs of a DVT include: pain, swelling and tenderness in one of your legs (usually your calf) a heavy ache in the affected area warm skin in the area of the clot redness of your skin, particularly at the back of your leg below the knee DVT usually, although not always, affects one leg. The pain may be worse when you bend your foot up towards your knee.  Part of the blood clot can sometimes break away and travel through the bloodstream. This is known as an embolism. Embolisms can be dangerous if they become lodged in the lungs (pulmonary embolism). This is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition because it can prevent blood from reaching your lungs. The symptoms of a pulmonary embolism are: chest or upper back pain shortness of breath coughing \u2013 usually dry but you may cough up blood or mucus containing blood feeling lightheaded or dizzy fainting See your GP immediately if you experience any combination of the above symptoms. Alternatively, you can call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service for advice. Dial 999 to request an ambulance if your symptoms are severe. Diagnosing thrombophilia Thrombophilia testing isn't routinely carried out on everyone who has a blood clot. Testing for inherited thrombophilia in people with venous thrombosis isn't usually needed because the results don't usually influence clinical decisions. For example, decisions regarding the length of treatment should be made by taking into consideration whether or not venous thrombosis was provoked, whether other risk factors are present, and the risk of bleeding due to treatment with anticoagulants, regardless of whether inherited thrombophilia is present or not. Thrombophilia is diagnosed by having blood tests weeks or months after your blood clot. The tests look for anticoagulant deficiencies. Before having the tests, you'll usually have to wait until you've stopped taking anticoagulant medicine, such as warfarin, for four to six weeks. If the blood test results indicate you have thrombophilia, you may be referred to a haematologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating blood disorders). Treating thrombophilia Treatment may not be needed if you have mild thrombophilia. If you develop a blood clot, you'll need treatment for the blood clot and treatment to prevent further clots. You may need to take warfarin tablets or have an injection of heparin. Warfarin and heparin Warfarin and heparin are anticoagulants (anti-clotting medicine). They interfere with the clotting process and are commonly used to treat or prevent DVT and pulmonary embolisms. If you need an anticoagulant to prevent a clot, you'll be prescribed warfarin. It will take a few days to work properly. If you need instant treatment for an existing clot, you'll usually be given a heparin injection (which works straight away), as well as warfarin tablets for the first few days. The injection will either be given in hospital or at home. A heparin injection may also be given to people with antiphospholipid syndrome, before and after surgery or during pregnancy. Unlike warfarin, heparin is safe to take in pregnancy. International Normalised Ratio (INR) test Your doctor will need to adjust your warfarin dose so your blood doesn't clot easily, but isn't too high to put you at risk of bleeding problems. You'll need to have a regular blood test called the International Normalised Ratio (INR) to measure your blood clotting ability while taking warfarin. You'll have the INR test less frequently once your ideal dose has been reached (an INR of two to three is usually the aim). Lifestyle advice If you have thrombophilia, it's important you're aware of the symptoms of a blood clot (see above), and that you see your GP immediately if you think you have one. You should also take the following precautions to lower your risk of blood clots: lose weight if you're overweight stop smoking if you smoke eat a healthy, balanced diet and exercise regularly avoid being immobile for long periods because this can cause a DVT (read more about preventing DVT) If you're pregnant, or planning to get pregnant, discuss this with your GP and inform the midwife and obstetrician about your condition. You may need to take low-dose aspirin or an anticoagulant medicine while you're pregnant to prevent problems occurring during pregnancy or miscarriage. If you're having a major operation, make sure you tell the healthcare professionals treating you about your condition. You may need a heparin injection to prevent a blood clot forming. Women with thrombophilia should avoid taking the combined oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) because they'll further increase your risk of developing a blood clot. Formation of a blood clot (thrombus)  Who gets blood clots? Anyone can get a blood clot but people most at risk are those who are unwell for long periods and unable to move around very much. Blood clots are often linked to long-haul plane journeys or the contraceptive pill, but you're much more likely to develop one after going into hospital. About two-thirds of all blood clots occur during or just after a stay in hospital. Read more about how and why blood clots occur. You can also use the venous thromboembolism (VTE) self-assessment tool to assess your risk of blood clots. Community content from HealthUnlocked Deep vein thrombosis Your risk of DVT is higher during pregnancy. Learn about the symptoms, risk factors and how it's treated Page last reviewed: 08\/09\/2014 Next review due: 08\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 70 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anticoagulants Arterial thrombosis Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Pulmonary embolism Warfarin External links NICE: reducing VTE risk Pulmonary embolism A pulmonary embolism is a blockage in the pulmonary artery, the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Prothrombin 20210","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/thrombophilia","content":"Thrombophilia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Thrombophilia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Thrombophilia Introduction  Thrombophilia is where the blood has an increased tendency to form clots. It's not a condition or a disorder itself, and is sometimes associated with blood clots (venous thromboses) that are caused by genetic changes (mutations). If you have thrombophilia, you're more likely to develop a blood clot in one of the large veins in your leg. This is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT).  It's important to be aware of the signs of a DVT, such as unexplained pain, swelling or tenderness in your leg (usually in your calf). See your GP as soon as possible if you have these symptoms (see below). The blood clotting process When you cut yourself, the bleeding usually triggers a number of chemical reactions in the blood. The chemical reactions cause a blood clot to form, which sticks to the injured part of the blood vessel along with blood cells called platelets. Clotting substances, known as clotting factors, help control bleeding and work with platelets to ensure the blood clots effectively. However, in thrombophilia, there's an imbalance in clotting chemicals and a person with the disorder either has too much clotting factor, or too little of the substance that prevents clotting. Types of thrombophilia There are many different types of thrombophilia. Some of the main types are outlined below. Factor V Leiden Factor V Leiden is a type of thrombophilia caused by a specific gene mutation. It's the most common type of inherited thrombophilia, with 3-8% of Europeans having one copy of the factor V Leiden mutation in each cell, and about one in 5,000 people having two copies of the mutation. It's less common in other populations. If you have Factor V Leiden, your risk of developing a DVT is increased (see above). There's also a higher risk of blood clots breaking away from their original location and travelling to other areas of your body through your bloodstream. This can be particularly serious if the blood clot becomes stuck in the main artery of your lungs (the pulmonary artery). This is known as a pulmonary embolism and it can be life-threatening (see below). Prothrombin 20210 mutation Prothrombin 20210 mutation, also known as Factor II mutation, is another genetic blood disorder that increases the risk of clots. Prothrombin is a protein in the blood which helps it to clot (thicken). However, in some people, a mutation in the gene that produces prothrombin causes too much to be produced, resulting in an increased tendency for blood clots, such as DVTs, to form. As with Factor V Leiden, prothrombin 20210 is more common in white people, particularly Europeans. Protein C, protein S or antithrombin deficiency Protein C, protein S, and antithrombin are natural anticoagulants (substances that prevent the blood from clotting). If you have low levels of these anticoagulants, or if they don't work properly, your risk of developing a DVT or pulmonary embolism is increased. Problems with protein C, protein S or antithrombin can be inherited but are rare. Antiphospholipid syndrome Antiphospholipid syndrome, also known as Hughes syndrome, is an immune system disorder that increases the risk of blood clots. Your body produces antibodies that attack phospholipids, a fat molecule thought to keep blood at the right consistency. The antibodies bind to the phospholipids, increasing your risk of a blood clot developing in a vein or artery. Symptoms of thrombophilia Thrombophilia is often mild and many people don't experience any health problems. Symptoms will only occur if the disorder causes a blood clot. People with thrombophilia are particularly at risk of developing a DVT.  Warning signs of a DVT include: pain, swelling and tenderness in one of your legs (usually your calf) a heavy ache in the affected area warm skin in the area of the clot redness of your skin, particularly at the back of your leg below the knee DVT usually, although not always, affects one leg. The pain may be worse when you bend your foot up towards your knee.  Part of the blood clot can sometimes break away and travel through the bloodstream. This is known as an embolism. Embolisms can be dangerous if they become lodged in the lungs (pulmonary embolism). This is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition because it can prevent blood from reaching your lungs. The symptoms of a pulmonary embolism are: chest or upper back pain shortness of breath coughing \u2013 usually dry but you may cough up blood or mucus containing blood feeling lightheaded or dizzy fainting See your GP immediately if you experience any combination of the above symptoms. Alternatively, you can call NHS 111 or contact your local out-of-hours service for advice. Dial 999 to request an ambulance if your symptoms are severe. Diagnosing thrombophilia Thrombophilia testing isn't routinely carried out on everyone who has a blood clot. Testing for inherited thrombophilia in people with venous thrombosis isn't usually needed because the results don't usually influence clinical decisions. For example, decisions regarding the length of treatment should be made by taking into consideration whether or not venous thrombosis was provoked, whether other risk factors are present, and the risk of bleeding due to treatment with anticoagulants, regardless of whether inherited thrombophilia is present or not. Thrombophilia is diagnosed by having blood tests weeks or months after your blood clot. The tests look for anticoagulant deficiencies. Before having the tests, you'll usually have to wait until you've stopped taking anticoagulant medicine, such as warfarin, for four to six weeks. If the blood test results indicate you have thrombophilia, you may be referred to a haematologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating blood disorders). Treating thrombophilia Treatment may not be needed if you have mild thrombophilia. If you develop a blood clot, you'll need treatment for the blood clot and treatment to prevent further clots. You may need to take warfarin tablets or have an injection of heparin. Warfarin and heparin Warfarin and heparin are anticoagulants (anti-clotting medicine). They interfere with the clotting process and are commonly used to treat or prevent DVT and pulmonary embolisms. If you need an anticoagulant to prevent a clot, you'll be prescribed warfarin. It will take a few days to work properly. If you need instant treatment for an existing clot, you'll usually be given a heparin injection (which works straight away), as well as warfarin tablets for the first few days. The injection will either be given in hospital or at home. A heparin injection may also be given to people with antiphospholipid syndrome, before and after surgery or during pregnancy. Unlike warfarin, heparin is safe to take in pregnancy. International Normalised Ratio (INR) test Your doctor will need to adjust your warfarin dose so your blood doesn't clot easily, but isn't too high to put you at risk of bleeding problems. You'll need to have a regular blood test called the International Normalised Ratio (INR) to measure your blood clotting ability while taking warfarin. You'll have the INR test less frequently once your ideal dose has been reached (an INR of two to three is usually the aim). Lifestyle advice If you have thrombophilia, it's important you're aware of the symptoms of a blood clot (see above), and that you see your GP immediately if you think you have one. You should also take the following precautions to lower your risk of blood clots: lose weight if you're overweight stop smoking if you smoke eat a healthy, balanced diet and exercise regularly avoid being immobile for long periods because this can cause a DVT (read more about preventing DVT) If you're pregnant, or planning to get pregnant, discuss this with your GP and inform the midwife and obstetrician about your condition. You may need to take low-dose aspirin or an anticoagulant medicine while you're pregnant to prevent problems occurring during pregnancy or miscarriage. If you're having a major operation, make sure you tell the healthcare professionals treating you about your condition. You may need a heparin injection to prevent a blood clot forming. Women with thrombophilia should avoid taking the combined oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) because they'll further increase your risk of developing a blood clot. Formation of a blood clot (thrombus)  Who gets blood clots? Anyone can get a blood clot but people most at risk are those who are unwell for long periods and unable to move around very much. Blood clots are often linked to long-haul plane journeys or the contraceptive pill, but you're much more likely to develop one after going into hospital. About two-thirds of all blood clots occur during or just after a stay in hospital. Read more about how and why blood clots occur. You can also use the venous thromboembolism (VTE) self-assessment tool to assess your risk of blood clots. Community content from HealthUnlocked Deep vein thrombosis Your risk of DVT is higher during pregnancy. Learn about the symptoms, risk factors and how it's treated Page last reviewed: 08\/09\/2014 Next review due: 08\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 70 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 40  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 18  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anticoagulants Arterial thrombosis Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Pulmonary embolism Warfarin External links NICE: reducing VTE risk Pulmonary embolism A pulmonary embolism is a blockage in the pulmonary artery, the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs Blood tests Find out how and why blood tests are carried out NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Protruding eyes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Exophthalmos","content":"Exophthalmos (bulging eyes) - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Exophthalmos (bulging eyes)  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Exophthalmos Clinical trials Exophthalmos Exophthalmos Treatment Introduction  Exophthalmos is a medical term for a bulging or protruding eyeball or eyeballs. It is often used interchangeably with the term \"proptosis\", which means the same thing. What causes exophthalmos? Exophthalmos can be caused by many different conditions. It's important that the underlying cause is identified so appropriate treatment can be given. Thyroid eye disease One of the main causes of exophthalmos in the UK is thyroid eye disease, also known as Graves' ophthalmopathy. This is an autoimmune condition that affects around one in every three people with an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) caused by Graves' disease. It is particularly common in women who are 30-50 years of age and people who smoke. An autoimmune condition is where the immune system (the body's defence against illness and infection) mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. In the case of thyroid eye disease, the immune system attacks the muscles and fatty tissues around and behind the eye, causing them to become inflamed (swollen). Graves' disease is an autoimmune condition in which the thyroid is attacked, leading to an increase in the level of thyroid hormones in your blood. It's not clear exactly why thyroid eye disease sometimes occurs along with this condition. Thyroid eye disease can also occasionally affect people with an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) and, in rare cases, people with seemingly normal thyroid function. Other causes Exophthalmos can also have a number of other causes, but these are generally less common than thyroid eye disease. Other cause of exophthalmos can include: an injury to the eyes bleeding behind the eyes abnormally shaped blood vessels behind the eyes an infection of the tissue in the eye socket cancerous tumours \u2013 such as those caused by neuroblastoma and some soft tissue sarcomas Exophthalmos can also affect newborn babies if they are born with eye sockets that are shallower than normal. Other problems associated with exophthalmos Depending on what is causing your bulging eyes, you may also have other associated symptoms. For example, if exophthalmos is caused by a thyroid eye disease, your eyes may also be: inflamed, red and painful dry and \"gritty\" tearful sensitive to light (photophobia) You may also experience some double vision. In severe cases of exophthalmos, you may not be able to close your eyes properly. This can damage your corneas (the transparent tissue that covers the front of your eye) by causing them to dry out. If your corneas become very dry, an infection or ulcers (open sores) may develop. These could damage your vision if left untreated. There is also a small risk of the optic nerve (which transmits signals from the eye to the brain) becoming compressed if you have exophthalmos, which may affect your sight permanently if it is not treated quickly. Seeking medical advice It's important to see your GP or an optometrist (optician) if you notice that one or both of your eyes are protruding, as treatment is often more effective if it's started as soon as possible. If necessary, your GP or optometrist can refer you to an ophthalmologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating eye conditions) for further assessment. The ophthalmologist will check how well you are able to move your eyes. They may also use an instrument called an exophthalmometer to measure how far your eyeball protrudes. If the ophthalmologist wants to examine your eye socket in more detail, a computerised tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan may be carried out. You may also have a blood test to assess how well your thyroid gland is working, and you may be referred for an assessment by an endocrinologist (a specialist in conditions affecting glands and hormones) if you are found to have abnormal thyroid hormone levels. Treating exophthalmos If exophthalmos is being caused by thyroid eye disease, the following treatments are often helpful: medication to correct the level of thyroid hormones in your blood \u2013 this will not necessarily improve the problems with your eyes, but may stop them getting worse corticosteroid medication given directly into a vein (intravenously) \u2013 this can help reduce the inflammation associated with the condition corrective surgery \u2013 this may be carried out to improve the appearance of your eyes once the inflammation is under control Other useful measures include stopping smoking, using artificial tears to reduce eye dryness and irritation, and wearing special lenses to correct double vision. In other cases, treatment will vary depending on the underlying cause of the condition. For example, treatments such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy and\/or surgery may be recommended if exophthalmos is caused by a tumour. Read more about treating exophthalmos. Outlook The outlook for exophthalmos can vary considerably. Many of the symptoms of thyroid eye disease tend to improve over time, although this can take a number of years, and there is a chance your eyes will continue to protrude if corrective surgery is not carried out. Some people with exophthalmos are left with long-term vision problems, such as double vision, but permanent visual impairment is rare if the condition is identified and treated promptly. Page last reviewed: 02\/10\/2014 Next review due: 02\/10\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 37 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Double vision Dry eyes Eye health Eyelid problems Overactive thyroid Red eye Underactive thyroid External links British Thyroid Association British Thyroid Foundation Eyecare Trust: thyroid eye disease RNIB: thyroid eye disease Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery Overactive thyroid Overactive thyroid, also known as hyperthyroidism, is a relatively common condition that occurs when there is too much thyroid hormone in the body Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pruritus","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Itching","content":"Itching - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Itching  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Itching Clinical trials Itching Itching Causes Itching Treatment Introduction  Itching is an unpleasant sensation that compels a person to scratch the affected area. The medical name for itching is pruritus. Itching can affect any area of the body. It can either be: generalised \u2013 where itching occurs over the whole body localised \u2013 where itching only occurs in a particular area Sometimes, there may be a rash or spot where the itching occurs. Mild, short-lived itching is common, but the problem can occasionally be severe and very frustrating to live with. Common causes of itching Itching can be caused by a number of different conditions, including: skin conditions \u2013 such as eczema allergies or skin reactions parasitic infestations \u2013 such as scabies insect bites and stings fungal infections \u2013 such as athlete\u2019s foot or vaginal thrush hormonal changes during pregnancy or the menopause systemic conditions (one that affects the whole body) \u2013 such as liver or kidney problems, or an overactive thyroid gland Read more about the possible causes of itching. Things you can do If you experience troublesome itching, there are some things you can do that may help relieve it and prevent damage caused by scratching, including: patting or tapping the itchy area, rather than scratching it holding a cold compress, such as damp flannel, over the affected area to cool it down bathing or showering in cool or lukewarm water using unperfumed personal hygiene products avoiding clothes that irritate your skin, such as wool or man-made fabrics using a moisturiser or emollient if your skin is dry or flaky There are also medicines, such as antihistamines and steroid creams, that are available over the counter from pharmacies that may help relieve itching caused by certain skin conditions. Read more about treatments to relieve itching. When to see your GP Many cases of itching will get better over a short period of time. However, you should visit your GP if your itch is: severe lasts for a long time keeps coming back associated with other symptoms \u2013 such as redness and swelling or jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) You should also visit your GP if your entire body itches and there is no obvious cause. It could be a symptom of a more serious condition. Your GP will ask you about your symptoms \u2013 for example, if you have noticed whether anything makes your itch worse, or if your itch comes and goes. They will also examine your skin to look for any visible symptoms. In some cases, they may take a skin scraping or a swab so it can be tested to help identify the cause of your itching. A blood test may also be carried out to look for underlying problems, such as thyroid or kidney disease. Depending on what is found to be causing your itch, you may be referred to a hospital specialist for a further assessment and specific treatment.  Page last reviewed: 11\/11\/2014 Next review due: 11\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 620 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 160  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 155  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 75  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antihistamines Atopic eczema Contact dermatitis Itchy bottom Steroid creams External links British Association of Dermatology: pruritus Itchy bottom Find out about common causes of an itchy bottom and the treatments available Eczema: 7 ways to stop scratching Eczema can be tough for a child to cope with, but parents can help reduce the impact with these tips Allergies Advice on allergies such as eczema and food allergy, and what treatments are available on the NHS NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pruritus ani","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Itchybottom","content":"Itchy bottom - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Itchy bottom  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Itchy bottom itchybottom Causes itchybottom Treatment   Itchy bottom (pruritus ani) is characterised by a strong urge to scratch the skin around your anus.  The anus is the opening at the lower end of the digestive system, where solid waste leaves your body. Causes of itchy bottom As itchy bottom is a symptom rather than a condition itself, many cases have an underlying cause, for example: a bacterial infection \u2013 such as those that cause streptococcal infections a skin condition \u2013 such as atopic eczema, where the skin becomes red, dry and flaky haemorrhoids (piles) \u2013 swellings that contain enlarged and swollen blood vessels in and around the anus In children, an itchy bottom is often caused by threadworms. But not all cases of itchy bottom have an identifiable cause. An itchy bottom can be made worse by: heat woollen clothing or blankets moisture soiling yourself stress or anxiety Read more about the causes of itchy bottom.  When to see your GP See your GP if you've had an itchy bottom for more than a few days, so they can try to find the cause. They may ask about: how often you wash and whether you use creams, powders or soaps around your anus the duration and pattern of your itching \u2013 such as whether your symptoms are worse at night or after eating certain foods other symptoms \u2013 such as bleeding or other discharge from your anus Your GP will usually want to examine the skin around your anus and may ask to carry out a digital rectal examination (DRE) to rule out more serious underlying conditions. You may feel awkward, but it's nothing to be embarrassed or worried about, as this is one of the most common examinations GPs carry out. If necessary, you may be referred to a specialist for further investigation and treatment. Treating itchy bottom An itchy bottom is usually easy to treat at home. Some ways of easing an itchy bottom include: keeping your bottom clean and dry avoid using scented soaps use soft toilet tissue avoid scratching Your GP can prescribe creams or ointments to help relieve your symptoms while the above self-care measures are taking effect. Check with your GP or pharmacist about how long you should use them for. If your itchy bottom is caused by an underlying condition, such as a bacterial infection or piles, it will also need to be treated. Read more about treating an itchy bottom. Complications of itchy bottom Frequently scratching your bottom may damage or tear the delicate skin around your anus. This may lead to problems such as: thick and leathery skin (lichenification) sore and broken down skin (ulceration) the top layer of skin being worn away (excoriation) infection The earlier these complications are diagnosed and treated, the quicker you'll recover. You should visit your GP if the skin around your anus changes or feels painful. If the cause of your itchy bottom can't be identified and treated, it may last for long periods of time (known as chronic itchy bottom). This may cause you to feel embarrassed, anxious or depressed. As the urge to scratch is often worse at night, your sleep may also be disturbed, leaving you feeling tired during the day. Speak to your GP if your itchy bottom is making you anxious or depressed, or if it's significantly affecting your sleep. Page last reviewed: 23\/06\/2016 Next review due: 23\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 393 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 186  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 101  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anal fissure Anal fistula Constipation Diarrhoea Haemorrhoids External links Embarassing problems: anal itching Itching Itching is a common symptom that can be caused by a number of conditions. Find out why it happens and what you can do about it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PSA test","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/livewell\/prostatehealth\/pages\/psa-test.aspx","content":"PSA test for prostate cancer - Live Well - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Should I have a PSA test? Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Prostate health Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus The PSA test is a blood test that can detect the early signs of an enlarged prostate. It is the most common initial test for men who are worried about prostate cancer. The test, which can be done at a GP surgery, measures the level of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in your blood. PSA is a protein made only by the prostate gland. Some of it will leak into your blood, and the amount depends on your age and the health of your prostate. Raised PSA levels The amount of PSA in your blood is measured in nanograms of PSA per millilitre of blood (ng\/ml). PSA levels can range from less than 1ng\/ml to hundreds of ng\/ml. If you're aged 50 to 69, your PSA level is considered raised if it's 3ng\/ml or higher. A raised PSA level in your blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. However, other conditions, such as an enlarged prostate, prostatitis, or a urinary infection, can also cause a raised PSA level. There are well-known issues with the accuracy of the PSA test and potential harmful consequences, which is why there is currently no national screening programme for prostate cancer in the UK.  Instead, all men over the age of 50 can access quality information about the PSA test and discuss the option of having a free test with their GP as part of a scheme called the prostate cancer risk management programme (PCRMP). Under PCRMP, your GP will be expected to discuss with you the benefits, limitations, and risks of the PSA test to help you decide whether or not to have it. You should also be given a leaflet about PSA testing for prostate cancer. The leaflet provides similar, but more detailed, information to what you'll find on this page. Men are at higher risk of prostate cancer if they have a family history of prostate cancer, are of black ethnic origin, or are overweight or obese. If you are worried about prostate cancer, you should talk to your GP. Read more about prostate cancer, including the symptoms of prostate cancer and treatments for prostate cancer, in our Health A-Z section. Pros and cons of the PSA test Pros It may reassure you if the test result is normal. It may give you an indication of cancer before symptoms develop. It may find cancer at an early stage, when treatment could prevent the cancer becoming more advanced. PSA testing may reduce your risk of dying from prostate cancer by 21%. If treatment is successful, you may avoid the risks of advanced cancer. In cases of advanced cancer, treatment will usually extend life.  Cons It can miss cancer and provide false reassurance. It may lead to unnecessary worry and medical tests when there is no cancer. It cannot tell the difference between slow-growing and fast-growing cancer. It may make you worry by finding slow-growing cancer that may never cause any symptoms or shorten your life. To save one life from prostate cancer, 27 men would have to be diagnosed with it. Before having the test If you're having a PSA test, you should not have: an active urinary infection ejaculated in the last 48 hours exercised heavily in the last 48 hours had a prostate biopsy in the last six weeks Each of these may give an inaccurate PSA reading. What happens after the test? There are usually three main options after a PSA test. A normal PSA level If your PSA level is not raised, you are unlikely to have cancer. No immediate action is needed, although you may have further PSA tests in the future. However, the PSA test doesn't always pick up prostate cancer. A slightly raised PSA level Three out of four men with a raised PSA level will not have prostate cancer. If your PSA level is slightly higher than normal, you probably don't have cancer, but you might need more PSA tests. A raised PSA level One out of four men with a raised PSA level will have cancer. The higher the level of PSA, the more likely it is to be a sign of cancer. If your PSA level is definitely raised, your GP will arrange for you to see a specialist for further tests to find out if you have prostate cancer. A PSA test alone cannot tell you whether you have prostate cancer. Your doctor may also perform a digital rectal examination (DRE). This is an examination of the prostate gland, during which the doctor will insert a gloved finger into your rectum. The DRE checks for signs of prostate cancer, such as the prostate gland feeling hard. However, a gland that feels normal does not necessarily mean you don't have cancer. Many early cancers may not be detected by a DRE, so a DRE is not recommended as a substitute for the PSA test. Your doctor will also consider your age, any family history of prostate cancer, your ethnic background, and any previous PSA test results. In some cases, extra PSA tests may help make the situation clearer or show any changes. Key PSA statistics About 15% of all men with a normal PSA level have prostate cancer. Three out of four men with a raised PSA level don't have prostate cancer. One out of four men with a raised PSA level will have cancer. Biopsies miss one in five prostate cancers. Biopsies and further testing If your PSA level is raised, a biopsy, which involves taking tissue samples from the prostate gland, may be needed to check if you have cancer. Prostate biopsies can miss some cancers. One in five cancers are missed at prostate biopsy. You may not know for sure that you don't have cancer after a clear result, and biopsies sometimes have to be repeated. Biopsies can sometimes cause complications. The most common is bleeding followed by infection. Most men experience blood in the urine and blood in the sperm after a biopsy. Antibiotics will be given to prevent infections. Prostate cancer treatment If early prostate cancer is found, the treatment you receive will depend on your individual circumstances. The type and size of the cancer and your general health are among factors that will be considered when deciding on the right type of treatment.  Most types of treatment, such as surgery and radiotherapy, come with serious side effects, including erection, fertility, and bladder problems. Read more about treating prostate cancer. You should talk to your consultant about the benefits and risks of any treatment before you begin. Page last reviewed: 25\/03\/2015 Next review due: 25\/03\/2017 More articles on: Prostate health Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 435 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 177  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 166  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 51  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Diagnosing prostate cancer Prostate disease Video: prostate cancer External links Prostate Cancer UK 'My PSA test found cancer' Prostate cancer survivor Guy Williams talks about the PSA test and why he decided to have surgery to remove his prostate gland Prostate health Every man has one, it's important to their sex life, yet few men know anything about their prostate or what can go wrong with it NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psoriasis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psoriasis","content":"Psoriasis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psoriasis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psoriasis Real stories Psoriasis Clinical trials Psoriasis Community Psoriasis Psoriasis Symptoms Psoriasis Causes Psoriasis Treatment Psoriasis Living with Introduction  Psoriasis is a skin condition that causes red, flaky, crusty patches of skin covered with silvery scales. These patches normally appear on your elbows, knees, scalp and lower back, but can appear anywhere on your body. Most people are only affected with small patches. In some cases, the patches can be itchy or sore. Psoriasis affects around 2% of people in the UK. It can start at any age, but most often develops in adults under 35 years old. The condition affects men and women equally. The severity of psoriasis varies greatly from person to person. For some people it's just a minor irritation, but for others it can have a major impact on their quality of life. Psoriasis is a long-lasting (chronic) disease that usually involves periods when you have no symptoms or mild symptoms, followed by periods when symptoms are more severe. Read more about the symptoms of psoriasis. Why it happens People with psoriasis have an increased production of skin cells. Skin cells are normally made and replaced every three to four weeks, but in psoriasis this process only lasts about three to seven days. The resulting build-up of skin cells is what creates the patches associated with psoriasis. Although the process isn't fully understood, it's thought to be related to a problem with the immune system. The immune system is your body's defence against disease and infection, but for people with psoriasis, it attacks healthy skin cells by mistake. Psoriasis can run in families, although the exact role that genetics plays in causing psoriasis is unclear. Many people's psoriasis symptoms start or become worse because of a certain event, known as a \"trigger\". Possible triggers of psoriasis include an injury to your skin, throat infections and using certain medicines. The condition isn't contagious, so it can't be spread from person to person. Read more about the causes of psoriasis. How psoriasis is diagnosed A GP can often diagnose psoriasis based on the appearance of your skin. In rare cases, a small sample of skin, called a biopsy, will be sent to the laboratory for examination under a microscope. This determines the exact type of psoriasis and rules out other skin disorders, such as seborrhoeic dermatitis, lichen planus, lichen simplex and pityriasis rosea. You may be referred to a dermatologist (a specialist in diagnosing and treating skin conditions) if your doctor is uncertain about your diagnosis, or if your condition is severe. If your doctor suspects you have psoriatic arthritis, which is sometimes a complication of psoriasis, you may be referred to a rheumatologist (a doctor who specialises in arthritis). You may have blood tests to rule out other conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, and X-rays of the affected joints may be taken. Treating psoriasis There's no cure for psoriasis, but a range of treatments can improve symptoms and the appearance of skin patches. In most cases, the first treatment used will be a topical treatment, such as vitamin D analogues or topical corticosteroids. Topical treatments are creams and ointments applied to the skin. If these aren't effective, or your condition is more severe, a treatment called phototherapy may be used. Phototherapy involves exposing your skin to certain types of ultraviolet light. In severe cases, where the above treatments are ineffective, systemic treatments may be used. These are oral or injected medicines that work throughout the whole body. Read more about treating psoriasis. Living with psoriasis Although psoriasis is just a minor irritation for some people, it can have a significant impact on quality of life for those more severely affected. For example, some people with psoriasis have low self-esteem because of the effect the condition has on their appearance. It's also quite common to develop tenderness, pain and swelling in the joints and connective tissue. This is known as psoriatic arthritis. Speak to your GP or healthcare team if you have psoriasis and you have any concerns about your physical and mental wellbeing. They can offer advice and further treatment if necessary. There are also support groups for people with psoriasis, such as The Psoriasis Association, where you can speak to other people with the condition. Read more about living with psoriasis. Want to know more? The Psoriasis Association: what is psoriasis?  PAPAA: about psoriasis Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 27\/05\/2015 Next review due: 27\/05\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 300 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 133  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 85  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Psoriasis Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Psoriasis is a skin condition that affects around 2% of people in the UK. A skin expert describes the impact psoriasis can have on quality of life, and the treatment options available. Media last reviewed: 20\/05\/2016 Next review due: 20\/05\/2018 Useful links NHS Choices links Steroid creams Healthy skin Emollients Depression External links Psoriasis Association National Psoriasis Foundation British Association of Dermatologists PAPAA: psoriasis support Psoriasis: young people Psoriasis: Ros's story Mum-of-three Ros Foreman explains how she copes with the daily challenges of living with psoriasis Psoriasis: 'Don't suffer in silence' Actor and comedian Toby Hadoke talks about living with severe psoriasis and gives his tips for taking control of this unpleasant skin condition Find and choose services for Psoriasis Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psoriatic arthritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/psoriatic-arthritis","content":"Psoriatic arthritis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psoriatic arthritis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview psoriatic-arthritis Clinical trials psoriatic-arthritis Community Psoriatic arthritis Introduction  Psoriatic arthritis is a type of arthritis that develops in some people with the skin condition psoriasis. It typically causes affected joints to become inflamed (swollen), stiff and painful. Between one and two in every five people with psoriasis will develop psoriatic arthritis. It usually develops within 10 years of psoriasis being diagnosed, although some people may experience problems with their joints before they notice any symptoms affecting their skin. Like psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis is thought to occur as a result of the immune system mistakenly attacking healthy tissue, but it's not clear why some people with psoriasis develop psoriatic arthritis and others don't. Signs and symptoms The pain, swelling and stiffness associated with psoriatic arthritis can affect any joint in the body, but the condition often affects joints including the hands, feet, knees, neck, spine and elbows. The severity of the condition can vary considerably from person to person. Some people may have severe problems affecting many joints, whereas others may only notice mild symptoms in one or two joints. There may be times when your symptoms improve (known as remission) and periods when they get worse (known as flare-ups or relapses). Relapses can be very difficult to predict, but can often be managed with medication when they do occur. When to seek medical advice You should speak to your GP if you experience persistent pain, swelling or stiffness in your joints \u2013 even if you haven't been diagnosed with psoriasis. If you have been diagnosed with psoriasis, you should have check-ups at least once a year to monitor your condition. Make sure you let your doctor know if you are experiencing any problems with your joints. Diagnosing psoriatic arthritis If your doctor thinks you may have arthritis, they should refer you to a rheumatologist (a specialist in joint conditions) for an assessment. A rheumatologist will usually be able to diagnose psoriatic arthritis if you have psoriasis and problems with your joints, and other types of arthritis \u2013 such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis \u2013 have been ruled out. A number of tests may be carried out to help confirm a diagnosis, including blood tests to check for signs of inflammation in your body and the presence of certain antibodies found in other types of arthritis, as well as X-rays or scans of your joints. Treating psoriatic arthritis The main aims of treatment will be to relieve your symptoms, slow the progression of the condition and improve your quality of life. For most people, this will involve trying a number of different medications, some of which can also treat the psoriasis. Ideally, you should take one medication to treat both your psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis whenever possible. The main medications used to treat psoriatic arthritis are summarised below. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Your GP may first prescribe non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to see if they help relieve pain and reduce inflammation. There are two types of NSAIDs and they work in slightly different ways: traditional NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen, naproxen or diclofenac COX-2 inhibitors (often called coxibs), such as celecoxib or etoricoxib Like all medications, NSAIDs can have side effects, but your doctor will take precautions to reduce the risk of these, such as prescribing the lowest dose necessary to control your symptoms for the shortest time possible. If side effects do occur, they usually affect the stomach and intestines, and can include indigestion and stomach ulcers. A medication called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) that helps protect your stomach by reducing the amount of acid it produces will therefore often be prescribed alongside NSAIDs. Read more about the side effects of NSAIDs. If NSAIDs alone are not helpful, some of the medications below may be recommended. Steroid medication (corticosteroids) Like NSAIDs, corticosteroids can help reduce pain and swelling.  If you have a single inflamed or swollen joint, your doctor may inject the medication directly into the joint. This can offer rapid relief with minimal side effects, and the effect can last from a few weeks to several months. Corticosteroids can also be taken as a tablet, or as an injection into the muscle, to help lots of joints. However, doctors are generally cautious about this because the medication can cause significant side effects if used in the long term, and psoriasis can flare up when you stop using it. Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are medications that work by tackling the underlying causes of the inflammation in your joints. They can help to ease your symptoms and slow the progression of psoriatic arthritis. The earlier you start taking a DMARD, the more effective it will be. Leflunomide is often the first drug given for psoriatic arthritis. Sulfasalazine or methotrexate may be considered as alternatives. You can click on the above links for more information on these medications, including the side effects. It can take several weeks or months to notice a DMARD working. Therefore, it is important to keep taking the medication, even if it doesn't seem to be working at first. Biological treatments Biological treatments are a newer form of treatment for psoriatic arthritis. You may be offered one of these treatments if: your psoriatic arthritis has not responded to at least two different types of DMARD you are not able to be treated with at least two different types of DMARD Biological drugs work by stopping particular chemicals in the blood from activating your immune system to attack the lining of your joints. Some of the biological medicines you may be offered are adalimumab, certolizumab, etanercept, infliximab and golimumab injections. See our page on treating psoriasis for more information about these medications. The most common side effect of biological treatments is a reaction in the area of skin where the medication is injected, such as redness, swelling or pain, although these reactions aren\u2019t usually serious. However, biological treatments can sometimes cause other side effects, including problems with your liver, kidneys or blood count, so you will usually need to have regular blood or urine tests to check for these. Biological treatments can also make you more likely to develop infections, so you should tell your doctor as soon as possible if you develop symptoms of an infection, such as a sore throat, a high temperature (fever), or diarrhoea. Biological medication will usually be recommended for three months at first, to see if it helps. If it is effective, the medication can be continued. Otherwise, your doctor may suggest stopping the medication or swapping to an alternative biological treatment. Complementary therapies There is not enough scientific research evidence to say that complementary therapies, such as balneotherapy (bathing in water containing minerals), works in treating psoriatic arthritis. There is also not enough evidence to support taking any kind of food supplement as treatment. Complementary therapies can sometimes react with other treatments, so you should talk to your GP, specialist or pharmacist if you are thinking of using any. Managing related conditions As with psoriasis and other types of inflammatory arthritis, you may be more likely to get some other conditions \u2013 such as cardiovascular disease (CVD) \u2013 if you have psoriatic arthritis. CVD is the term for conditions of the heart or blood vessels, such as heart disease and stroke. Your doctor should carry out tests each year (such as blood pressure and cholesterol tests) so they can check whether you have CVD and offer additional treatment, if necessary. You can also help yourself by: having a good balance between rest and regular physical activity losing weight, if you are overweight not smoking only drinking moderate amounts of alcohol Read more about living with psoriasis and preventing CVD. Your care team As well as your GP and a rheumatologist, you may also be cared for by: a specialist nurse \u2013 who will often be your first point of contact with your specialist care team a dermatologist (skin specialist) \u2013 who will be responsible for treating your psoriasis symptoms a physiotherapist \u2013 who can devise an exercise plan to keep your joints mobile an occupational therapist \u2013 who can identify any problems you have in everyday activities and find ways to overcome or manage these a psychologist \u2013 who can offer psychological support if you need it Outlook Like psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis is a long-term condition that can get progressively worse. In severe cases, there is a risk of the joints becoming permanently damaged or deformed, which may require surgical treatment. However, with an early diagnosis and appropriate treatment, it is possible to slow down the progression of the condition and minimise or prevent permanent damage to the joints. Psoriatic arthritis often affects the joints in the hands  Joint pain Joint pain is a very common problem with many possible causes, but it's usually the result of injury or arthritis Page last reviewed: 10\/09\/2014 Next review due: 10\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 343 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 164  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 90  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 23  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Arthritis Joint pain Psoriasis External links Arthritis Research UK: psoriatic arthritis The Pain Toolkit Psoriasis Association Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis Alliance Community content from HealthUnlocked Living with pain What to do about different types of pain, including joint pain, back pain and migraines, plus how to manage long-term pain Easy exercises Improve your fitness without harming your joints with some easy exercises, including yoga, pilates, and swimming NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"PSP","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Progressive-supranuclear-palsy","content":"Progressive supranuclear palsy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Progressive supranuclear palsy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Clinical trials Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Community Progressive supranuclear palsy Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Symptoms Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Diagnosis Progressive-supranuclear-palsy Treatment Introduction  Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare and progressive condition that can cause problems with balance, movement, vision, speech and swallowing. It's caused by increasing numbers of brain cells becoming damaged over time. The PSP Association estimates there are around 4,000 people with PSP living in the UK. However, it's thought that the true figure could be much higher, because many cases may be misdiagnosed. Most cases of PSP develop in people who are over 60 years of age. What causes PSP? PSP occurs when brain cells in certain parts of the brain are damaged as a result of a build-up of a protein called tau. Tau occurs naturally in the brain and is usually broken down before it reaches high levels. In people with PSP, it isn't broken down properly and forms harmful clumps in brain cells. The amount of abnormal tau in the brain can vary among people with PSP, as can the location of these clumps. This means the condition can have a wide range of symptoms. The condition has been linked to changes in certain genes, but these genetic faults are not inherited and the risk to other family members, including children or siblings of someone with PSP, is very low. PSP symptoms The symptoms of PSP usually get gradually worse over time. At first, the symptoms can be similar to some other conditions, which makes it difficult to diagnose early on. Some of the main symptoms of PSP include: problems with balance and mobility, including frequent falls changes in behaviour, such as irritability or apathy (lack of interest) muscle stiffness  an inability to control eye and eyelid movement, including focusing on specific objects or looking up or down at something slow, quiet or slurred speech difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) slowness of thought and some memory problems The rate at which the symptoms progress can vary widely from person to person. Read more about the symptoms of PSP. Diagnosing PSP There's no single test for PSP. Instead, the diagnosis is based on the pattern of your symptoms. Your doctor will try to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as Parkinson's disease. The large number of possible symptoms of PSP also makes it difficult to diagnose correctly and can mean it takes a while to get a definitive diagnosis. You may need to have a brain scan to look for other possible causes of your symptoms, as well as tests of your memory, concentration and ability to understand language. The diagnosis must be made or confirmed by a consultant with expertise in PSP. This will usually be a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves). Read more about how PSP is diagnosed. Treatments for PSP There's currently no cure for PSP, but research into new treatments that aim to relieve symptoms and prevent the condition getting worse is continuing. Treatment currently focuses on relieving the symptoms, while trying to ensure that someone with PSP has the best possible quality of life. As someone with PSP can be affected in many different ways, treatment and care is provided by a team of health and social care professionals working together. Treatment will be tailored to meet the needs of each individual: medication \u2013 to improve balance, stiffness and other symptoms physiotherapy \u2013 to help with movement and balance difficulties speech and language therapy \u2013 to help with speech or swallowing problems occupational therapy \u2013 to help improve the skills needed for daily activities botulinum toxin injections or special glasses \u2013 to help with eye problems feeding tubes \u2013 to help manage dysphagia and avoid malnutrition or dehydration Read more about how PSP is treated. Outlook Unfortunately, there's currently nothing that can be done to stop PSP gradually worsening, although research into new treatments gives hope that this may be possible in the future. Good care and assistance can help someone with PSP to be more independent and enjoy a better quality of life, but the condition will eventually put them at risk of serious complications. It\u2019s a good idea to talk to your doctor about what you\u2019d like to happen when the condition reaches this stage. Difficulty swallowing can cause choking, or inhaling food or liquid into the airways. This can lead to pneumonia, which can be life-threatening; however, help from a speech and language therapist at an early stage can lower this risk for as long as possible. As a result of these complications, the average life expectancy for someone with PSP is around six or seven years from when their symptoms start. However, it can be much longer, as the timespan varies from person to person. Information about you If you have PSP, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 07\/09\/2015 Next review due: 07\/09\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 249 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 127  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 67  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Care and support guide Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) End of life care Parkinson\u2019s disease External links PSP Association PSP Association: everyday living What is care and support? Find out how care and support can help if you have extra needs because you are disabled, have a long-term condition or are elderly Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychiatry","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psychiatry","content":"Psychiatry - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psychiatry  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psychiatry Clinical trials Psychiatry Introduction  Psychiatry is a medical field concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mental health conditions. A doctor who works in psychiatry is called a psychiatrist. Unlike other mental health professionals, such as psychologists and counsellors, psychiatrists must be medically qualified doctors who have chosen to specialise in psychiatry. This means they can prescribe medication as well as recommend other forms of treatment. Most psychiatrists work as part of community mental health teams (CMHTs), in outpatient clinics or hospital wards. Some carry out sessions in GP surgeries. What conditions can psychiatrists treat? Mental health conditions that may be diagnosed and treated by a psychiatrist include: anxiety  phobias  obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  personality disorders  schizophrenia and paranoia depression and bipolar disorder eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimia sleep disorders, such as insomnia addictions, such as drug or alcohol misuse Psychiatrists may also provide psychological support for people with long-term, painful or terminal physical health conditions. Getting an appointment with a psychiatrist You'll usually need a referral from your GP or another doctor to see a psychiatrist on the NHS. Your GP may refer you directly to a psychiatrist or to a member of a local mental health team, who can assess your needs and help determine if you need to see a psychiatrist or a different mental health professional. You can also see a psychiatrist privately, although most private psychiatrists prefer a referral from your GP. Your GP may be able to recommend psychiatrists in your area. You can also try contacting a psychiatric clinic directly or using online services such as Psychiatry UK. You'll see a psychiatrist who specialises in the area of psychiatry most relevant to your situation. The main areas of expertise include: childhood and adolescent psychiatry general adult psychiatry older person's psychiatry learning disabilities  psychotherapy (talking therapies) You can check the details of a psychiatrist, including their area of speciality, by looking on the medical register, a directory of all practising doctors in the UK. If they have the letters MRCPsych (Member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists) or FRCPsych (Fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists) after their name, they're a current member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych). What happens during your appointments During your first appointment, your psychiatrist will carry out an initial assessment. They'll look at both your mental and physical health, and may ask: about the problem that brought you to see them general questions about your life and thoughts to carry out a simple physical examination, such as checking your blood pressure \u2013 for example, before prescribing certain medications to get information from other sources, such as your GP, relatives and social workers After assessing your condition, the psychiatrist may prescribe medication or recommend other treatments, such as counselling or cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).  The number of times you need to see a psychiatrist and the length of each appointment will depend on your circumstances. A psychiatrist may continue to manage your treatment or they may refer you to other community mental health services in your area. These services work in small units or clinics and aim to help people manage their illness so they can lead a normal life within the community. Page last reviewed: 17\/08\/2015 Next review due: 17\/08\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 184 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 83  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 4  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Counselling Depression Find psychological therapy services Mental health Psychotherapy External links Depression Alliance Mental Health Foundation Mind Royal College of Psychiatrists: how to get help Samaritans SANE Time to change Turning Point Mental health Get information about mental health problems, find out where to get help, and read other people's stories Finding a therapist What to look for in a counsellor or therapist and how to benefit from your sessions Find psychological therapy services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psychosis","content":"Psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psychosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psychosis Real stories Psychosis Clinical trials Psychosis Psychosis Symptoms Psychosis Causes Psychosis Diagnosis Psychosis Treatment Psychosis Complications Introduction  Psychosis is a mental health problem that causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. This might involve hallucinations or delusions. The two main symptoms of psychosis are: hallucinations \u2013 where a person hears, sees and, in some cases, feels, smells or tastes things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 where a person believes things that, when examined rationally, are obviously untrue \u2013 for example, thinking your next door neighbour is planning to kill you The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can often severely disrupt perception, thinking, emotion, and behaviour. Experiencing the symptoms of psychosis is often referred to as having a psychotic episode. What causes psychosis? Psychosis isn't a condition in itself \u2013 it's triggered by other conditions. It's sometimes possible to identify the cause of psychosis as a specific mental health condition, such as: schizophrenia \u2013 a condition that causes a range of psychological symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions bipolar disorder \u2013 a mental health condition that affects mood; a person with bipolar disorder can have episodes of depression (lows) and mania (highs) severe depression \u2013 some people with depression also have symptoms of psychosis when they're very depressed Psychosis can also be triggered by traumatic experiences, stress, or physical conditions, such as Parkinson's disease, a brain tumour, or as a result of drug misuse or alcohol misuse. How often a psychotic episode occurs and how long it lasts can depend on the underlying cause. For example, schizophrenia can be long term, but most people can make a good recovery and about a quarter only have a single psychotic episode. Episodes related to bipolar disorder usually resolve, but may recur. Read more about the causes of psychosis. Diagnosing psychosis You should see your GP immediately if you're experiencing psychotic episodes. It's important psychosis is treated as soon as possible as early treatment usually has better long-term outcomes. Your GP will look at your symptoms and rule out short-term causes, such as drug misuse. They may ask you some questions to help determine what's causing your psychosis. For example, they may ask you: whether you're taking any medication whether you've been taking illegal substances how your mood has been \u2013 for example, whether you've been depressed how you've been functioning day-to-day \u2013 for example, whether you're still working whether you have a family history of mental health conditions \u2013 such as schizophrenia about your hallucinations \u2013 such as whether you've heard voices about your delusions \u2013 such as whether you feel people are controlling you whether you have any other symptoms Your GP should refer you to a mental health specialist for further assessment and treatment. Read more about diagnosing psychosis. Treating psychosis Treatment for psychosis involves using a combination of: antipsychotic medication \u2013 which can help relieve the symptoms of psychosis psychological therapies \u2013 the one-to-one talking therapy cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) has proved successful in helping people with schizophrenia; in appropriate cases, family therapy has been shown to reduce the need for hospital treatment in people with psychosis social support \u2013 support with social needs, such as education, employment, or accommodation Most people with psychosis who get better with medication need to continue taking it for at least a year. Some people need to take medication long term to prevent symptoms recurring. If a person's psychotic episodes are severe, they may need to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital. Read more about the treatment of psychosis. Getting help for others People with psychosis often have a lack of insight. They're unaware that they're thinking and acting strangely. Because of their lack of insight, it's often down to the friends, relatives, or carers of a person affected by psychosis to seek help for them. If you're concerned about someone you know and think they may have psychosis, you could contact their social worker or community mental health nurse if they've previously been diagnosed with a mental health condition. If you think the person's symptoms are placing them at possible risk of harm, you can: take them to the nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if they agree call their GP or local out-of-hours GP call 999 and ask for an ambulance Read more about how to get help for others. Complications People with a history of psychosis are much more likely to have drug or alcohol misuse problems, or both. This may be because these substances can provide short-term symptom relief, although they usually make symptoms worse in the long term. People with psychosis also have a higher than average risk of suicide. It's estimated 1 in 5 people with psychosis will attempt to commit suicide at some point in their life, and 1 in 25 people with psychosis will kill themselves. Side effects can also occur if someone is taking antipsychotics on a long-term basis. Weight gain is a common side effect. In rare cases, a person with psychosis may also develop type 2 diabetes. Read more about the complications of psychosis. Psychosis: Sarah's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Sarah, 19, describes her experience of psychosis. Find out how early help from local services can help young people who live with mental illness. Media last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Who's affected by psychosis? Psychosis is more common than most people realise, with schizophrenia being the most commonly associated mental health condition. Recent research found one new case of psychosis is diagnosed for every 2,000 people in England in any given year. Another study estimated around 3 in 100 people will have at least one episode of psychosis at some point in their life. Psychosis can develop at any age, but is rare in children under the age of 15. Community content from HealthUnlocked Depression Depression is more than feeling unhappy or fed up for a few days. But most people can make a full recovery with the right treatment and support Page last reviewed: 31\/07\/2014 Next review due: 30\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 461 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 222  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Help and support for young people Mental health hub for young people with advice on depression, anxiety, self-harm, stress, bullying and eating disorders Do you feel you can't go on? If you are feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope, here are the people who can help Useful links NHS Choices links Bipolar disorder Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Psychotherapy Psychotic depression Schizophrenia Find mental health services near you External links Action on Postpartum Psychosis Mental Health Foundation: psychosis Mind: psychosis NICE: psychosis and schizophrenia in adults Rethink Mental Illness: psychosis Turning Point: mental health support Young Minds Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is a mental health condition that causes hallucinations, delusions, muddled thoughts, and changes in behaviour Mental health helplines Whether you're concerned about yourself or a loved one, these helplines can offer expert advice 'Samaritans saved my life' How a telephone call to the Samaritans helped save Duncan Irvine's life NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychosis after childbirth","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postpartum-psychosis","content":"Postpartum (after childbirth) psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postpartum psychosis   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postpartum-psychosis Community Postpartum psychosis (psychosis after childbirth) Introduction  Postpartum psychosis is a severe mental illness that can affect a woman after she has a baby. It causes her to have hallucinations and delusional thinking (symptoms of psychosis). Postpartum psychosis is thought to affect around one in every 1,000 women who give birth. It's sometimes referred to as puerperal psychosis or postnatal psychosis. Read on to find out: What are the symptoms? How serious can it be? Who is at risk? What should I do if I think someone has developed postpartum psychosis? What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? How is it treated? What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? Can it be prevented? What's the outlook? What support is available? What are the symptoms of postpartum psychosis? Most women with postpartum psychosis will experience psychosis (a 'psychotic episode') and other symptoms very soon after giving birth, usually within the first two weeks. Some women develop symptoms later than this \u2013 sometimes at the time they stop breastfeeding, or when their periods restart. Psychosis Psychosis causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. The two main symptoms are: hallucinations \u2013 usually hearing or seeing things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true (for example believing you've won the lottery) The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can severely disrupt her perception, thinking, emotions and behaviour. Other symptoms A woman with postpartum psychosis may also behave in a way that is out of character, and may experience: a high mood (mania) \u2013 she may talk and think too much or too quickly, feel 'on top of the world', or be more sociable than normal a loss of inhibitions paranoia, feeling suspicious or fearful restlessness or agitation a low mood \u2013 she may show signs of depression and be withdrawn or tearful, with a lack of energy, loss of appetite, anxiety, irritability or trouble sleeping severe confusion Her mood may change rapidly. Some affected women experience symptoms of mania and depression at the same time. How serious can it be? Postpartum psychosis is a serious mental illness that should be treated as a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, the postpartum psychosis can get worse rapidly.  The illness could cause her to neglect or harm her baby or harm herself. She may not realise she is ill, and it may be up to her partner, family or friends to spot the warning signs and take action \u2013 see What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis?'. The majority of women with postpartum psychosis make a full recovery, and often very quickly provided they receive the right treatment. Who is at risk of postpartum psychosis? Postpartum psychosis is more likely to affect women who: have had postpartum psychosis before already have a serious mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia have a relative who has experienced psychosis (even if the woman herself has no mental illness) Once a woman develops postpartum psychosis, there's a high chance she will have another episode following future pregnancies. What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis? Contact your GP immediately if you think someone you know may have developed postnatal psychosis. If this isn't possible, call NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service. If you think there's a danger of imminent harm, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? If you already have a care plan because you've been assessed to be at high risk, there should be an emergency number you can call to reach a crisis team. If you don't have a care plan, and think you're having a psychotic episode, see your GP urgently or go to A&E. How is postpartum psychosis treated? Postpartum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency. The woman may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Ideally, she would be admitted with her baby to a specialist psychiatric unit called a mother and baby unit. For some women, this allows them to continue bonding with their baby and gives them confidence in their role as mother. Medication Typically, a woman with postpartum psychosis would be prescribed one or more of the following drugs: An antidepressant, which works by balancing mood-altering chemicals in the brain. It can help ease symptoms such as low mood, irritability, lack of concentration and sleeplessness, allowing the mother to function normally and cope better with her new baby. An antipsychotic (neuroleptic), which works by blocking the effect of dopamine (a chemical that transmits messages in the brain). A mood stabilising drug. If lithium is prescribed, regular blood tests are needed at least every three months to make sure lithium levels are not too high or low. Doctors will weigh up the effectiveness of these medications with the risk of side effects and the risk of any harmful effects on pregnancy or breastfeeding. What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? We're not really sure what causes postpartum psychosis. Fluctuations in hormones and sleep patterns could play a role, and there does seem to be a genetic basis, as a woman is more likely to develop the illness if her close relative had it. There seems to be link between postpartum psychosis and bipolar disorder. It's important to understand that postpartum psychosis is not caused by anything the woman did, nor is it caused by stress, relationship problems or a baby being unwanted. Can postpartum psychosis be prevented? A woman's risk of developing postpartum psychosis should be assessed during her antenatal appointments so that if she were to develop the illness after giving birth, the signs would be spotted straight away and there would be a treatment plan to follow. There are no specific screening tools for postpartum psychosis, but the antenatal care team should be able to identify women who are more likely to develop it and refer them to a psychiatrist for an assessment. If you're at high risk... If you've been assessed to be at high risk of developing postpartum psychosis, you may be offered a pre-birth planning meeting at around 32 weeks of pregnancy. Everyone involved in your care would be invited to this meeting \u2013 your partner, family or friends, a mental health professional, midwife, obstetrician, health visitor and GP.  The aim is to make everyone aware of your risk and to agree on a plan for your care. Studies suggest that taking certain medicines in late pregnancy could help to prevent postpartum psychosis in high-risk women. You may want to discuss this option with your care team. The risks and benefits of medication taken in pregnancy should always be carefully weighed up. You may also be given advice on what you can do to stay as well as possible during pregnancy \u2013 for example, reducing any stress in your life, and getting as much sleep as possible. You'll get a copy of your written care plan, which should include how you and your family can get help quickly if you were to become ill \u2013 see What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? In the first few weeks after your baby is born, you should be regularly visited by a midwife, health visitor and mental health nurse. What's the outlook for someone with postpartum psychosis? With treatment, the vast majority of women with postpartum psychosis start to feel better very quickly.  Some mothers have difficulty bonding with their baby after an episode of postpartum psychosis, but this doesn't usually last long. With support from family, friends and the mental health team, most women go on to have very good relationship with their child. About half of women who have postpartum psychosis will go on to have another episode in the future \u2013 not necessarily after having another child. In these cases, they should be able to get help quickly. With appropriate treatment, this risk can be reduced. An episode of postpartum psychosis is sometimes followed by period of depression, anxiety and low confidence. It might take a while to come to terms with what happened.  Further advice and support Women who have experienced or are experiencing postpartum psychosis may find the following charities and forums helpful: Action Postpartum Psychosis The Association for Post Natal Illness PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Postpartum psychosis can be stressful and distressing for partners, too. It can be isolating and lonely if both their baby and partner is in hospital. If you are struggling to cope because your partner is going through an episode of postpartum psychosis or recovering from this, don't be afraid to get help yourself. Talk to a mental health professional involved in your partner's care, or approach one of the above charities. Helping your partner recover from postpartum psychosis You can help your partner by: being calm and supportive taking time to listen to her helping with housework and cooking helping with child care and night time feeds letting her get as much sleep as possible letting others help with shopping and household chores so you have more family time together not having too many friends visiting keeping the home environment as calm and quiet as possible  Page last reviewed: 19\/09\/2014 Next review due: 19\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Psychosis Mental health problems and pregnancy The Mental Health Act Postnatal depression External links National Childbirth Trust PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Action Postpartum Psychosis Association for Post Natal Illness Community content from HealthUnlocked Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychotherapy","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psychotherapy","content":"Psychotherapy - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psychotherapy  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psychotherapy Clinical trials Psychotherapy Psychotherapy How it works Psychotherapy Availability Introduction  Psychotherapy is a type of therapy used to treat emotional problems and mental health conditions. It involves talking to a trained therapist, either one-to-one, in a group or with your wife, husband or partner. It allows you to look deeper into your problems and worries, and deal with troublesome habits and a wide range of mental disorders, such as depression and schizophrenia. Psychotherapy usually involves talking, but sometimes other methods may be used \u2013 for example, art, music, drama and movement. Psychotherapy can help you discuss feelings you have about yourself and other people, particularly family and those close to you. In some cases, couples or families are offered joint therapy sessions together. You will meet your therapist regularly, usually once a week, for several months, or sometimes even years. Individual sessions last about 50 minutes, but group sessions are often a bit longer. Read more about how psychotherapy works. Psychotherapists Psychotherapists are mental health professionals who are trained to listen to a person's problems to try to find out what's causing them and help them find a solution. As well as listening and discussing important issues with you, a psychotherapist can suggest strategies for resolving problems and, if necessary, help you change your attitudes and behaviour. Some therapists teach specific skills to help you tolerate painful emotions, manage relationships more effectively, or improve behaviour. You may also be encouraged to develop your own solutions. In group therapy, the members support each other with advice and encouragement. A therapist will treat sessions as confidential. This means you can trust them with information that may be personal or embarrassing. What is psychotherapy used to treat? Psychotherapy can be used to treat a wide range of mental health conditions, including:  depression  anxiety disorders  borderline personality disorder (BPD)   obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)   post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  long-term illnesses eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia and binge eating drug misuse People with significant emotional problems may also benefit from psychotherapy, including people dealing with stress, bereavement, divorce, redundancy, or relationship problems. Types of psychotherapy Several different types of psychotherapy are available. These include: psychodynamic (psychoanalytic) psychotherapy \u2013 a psychoanalytic therapist will encourage you to say whatever is going through your mind. This will help you become aware of hidden meanings or patterns in what you do or say that may be contributing to your problems. cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) \u2013 a form of psychotherapy that examines how beliefs and thoughts are linked to behaviour and feelings. It teaches skills that retrain your behaviour and style of thinking to help you deal with stressful situations. cognitive analytical therapy (CAT) \u2013 uses methods from both psychodynamic psychotherapy and CBT to work out how your behaviour causes problems, and how to improve it through self-help and experimentation. interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) \u2013 looks at the way an illness can be triggered by events involving relationships with others, such as bereavements, disputes or relocation. It helps you cope with the feelings involved, as well as work out coping strategies. humanistic therapies \u2013 encourage you to think about yourself more positively and aim to improve your self-awareness. family and couple (systemic) therapy \u2013 therapy with other members of your family that aims to help you work out problems together. The type of therapy that's most suitable for you will depend on the problem you have. Read more about how psychotherapy works. How can I get psychotherapy? If you think you might benefit from psychotherapy, the best place to start is with your GP. In some cases, it may be possible for your GP or another healthcare professional to refer you a qualified psychotherapist for free treatment on the NHS. However, waiting lists for NHS treatment are often long. Alternatively, you might choose to pay for private treatment. In these cases, it's important to make sure your therapist is registered with a recognised professional organisation and to be aware of the costs involved. Typically, a 50-minute one-to-one session can range from £40 to £100. Read more about the availability of psychotherapy. Finding psychotherapy services When looking for a psychotherapist, make sure they're fully qualified and, if appropriate, that they have experience of treating your specific condition. You can search the directory of psychological therapy services to find what's available in your area. Your GP may also be able to recommend a local qualified psychotherapist, or you can check the registers of the various organisations of registered psychotherapists. For example, the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) can help you find a therapist, as can the UK Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP). Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 14\/04\/2015 Next review due: 14\/04\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 125 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 20  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 8  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Can I get free therapy or counselling? Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Counselling Depression Find psychological therapy services Psychiatry Self-help therapies External links British Association for Counselling & Psychotherapy British Psychoanalytic Council (BPC): psychoanalytic psychotherapy Counselling Directory: find a psychotherapist Mental Health Foundation Mind Royal College of Psychiatry: psychotherapies UK Council for Psychotherapy The Headroom - Therapist Matching Service Welldoing: find a therapist Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Free audio guides to boost your mood Eight Moodzone mental wellbeing audio guides designed to help you better understand the problems you may be facing in your life Benefits of talking therapy Find out about counselling and talking therapies, and how they can help Find psychological therapy services Find and compare services Location Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychotic depression","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Depression\/Pages\/psychotic-depression.aspx","content":"Clinical depression - psychotic depression - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Clinical depression - psychotic depression  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Depression Real stories Depression Clinical trials Depression Community Clinical depression Depression Symptoms Depression Causes Depression Diagnosis Depression Treatment Depression Living with Depression Psychotic depression Psychotic depression  Some people who have severe clinical depression will also experience hallucinations and delusional thinking, the symptoms of psychosis. Depression with psychosis is known as psychotic depression. What are the symptoms of severe depression? Having severe clinical depression means feeling sad and hopeless for most of the day, practically every day, and having no interest in anything. Getting through the day feels almost impossible. Other typical symptoms of severe depression are: fatigue (exhaustion) loss of pleasure in things disturbed sleep changes in appetite feeling worthless and guilty being unable to concentrate or being indecisive thoughts of death or suicide Read more about the psychological, physical and social symptoms of clinical depression. What are the symptoms of psychosis? Having moments of psychosis (psychotic episodes) means experiencing: delusions \u2013 thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true  hallucinations \u2013 when a person hears (and in some cases feels, smells, sees or tastes) things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices (read more about hallucinations and hearing voices) The delusions and hallucinations almost always reflect the person's deeply depressed mood \u2013 for example, they may become convinced they're to blame for something, or that they've committed a crime. \"Psychomotor agitation\" is also common \u2013 this means not being able to relax or sit still, and constantly fidgeting.  Or, at the other extreme, a person with psychotic depression may have \"psychomotor retardation\", where both their thoughts and physical movements slow down. People with psychotic depression are at greater risk than normal of thinking about suicide. What's the cause? The cause of psychotic depression is not fully understood. What we do know is that there's no single cause of depression and it has many different triggers. For some, stressful life events such as bereavement, divorce, serious illness or financial worries can be the cause. Genes probably play a part, as severe depression can run in families, although it's not known why some people also develop psychosis. Many people with psychotic depression will have experienced adversity in childhood, such as a traumatic event. Learn more about the causes of clinical depression. How is it treated? Treatment for psychotic depression involves: medication \u2013 a combination of antipsychotics and antidepressants can help relieve the symptoms of psychosis psychological therapies \u2013 the one-to-one talking therapy cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) has proved successful in helping some people with psychosis social support \u2013 support with social needs, such as education, employment or accommodation The patient may need to stay in hospital for a short period while they're receiving this treatment. Sometimes electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be recommended if the patient has severe depression and other treatments, including antidepressants, haven't worked. Read more about ECT. Treatment is usually very effective, although patients may need to be continuously monitored in follow-up appointments. Getting help for others People with psychosis are often unaware that they're thinking and acting strangely. Because of this lack of insight, it's often down to the friends, relatives or carers of a person affected by psychosis to seek help for them. If you're concerned about someone you know and think they may have psychosis, you could contact their social worker or community mental health nurse if they've previously been diagnosed with a mental health condition. If this is the first time they've shown symptoms, contact their GP or take them to A&E. If you think the person\u2019s symptoms are placing them at possible risk of harm you can: take them to the nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if they agree call their GP or local out-of-hours GP call 999 and ask for an ambulance Support and advice More information on psychosis SANE Supporting someone who has experienced psychosis Mind Driving Having psychosis could affect your ability to drive. If you have been diagnosed with psychotic depression, it's your legal obligation to tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) as it could affect your driving ability. GOV.UK provides details about telling the DVLA about a medical condition. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 19\/08\/2014 Next review due: 19\/08\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 62 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 49  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Help and support for young people Mental health hub for young people with advice on depression, anxiety, self-harm, stress, bullying and eating disorders Do you feel you can't go on? If you are feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope, here are the people who can help Find depression self-help groups Depression self-help groups near LocationName   Change Use my current location Your location could not be found. Please try again or enter an alternative location. Please enter a location. Enter a postcode or town MainLocationName is set as your main location delete LocationName will no longer be used as your main location Confirm Cancel Sorry, there has been a problem retrieving your results. Please try again later. No depression self-help groups were found near LocationName Search a wider area or change location View more results Mental health news Being sick of the daily commute could be affecting your health Childhood head injury linked to range of adult health problems Virtual reality helped improve nerve function in paralysed people View more stories Useful links NHS Choices links Antidepressants Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Find psychological therapy services (IAPT) Mental health Psychotic depression Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) External links Charlie Waller Memorial Trust Depression Alliance Depression UK healthtalk.org: depression real stories Mind: depression Moodjuice: depression Rethink Mental Illness: depression RCPsych: depression Time to change: personal blogs and stories YoungMinds Postpartum psychosis Postpartum psychosis is thought to affect around one in every 1,000 women who give birth NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Psychotic episodes","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/Psychosis","content":"Psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Psychosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Psychosis Real stories Psychosis Clinical trials Psychosis Psychosis Symptoms Psychosis Causes Psychosis Diagnosis Psychosis Treatment Psychosis Complications Introduction  Psychosis is a mental health problem that causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. This might involve hallucinations or delusions. The two main symptoms of psychosis are: hallucinations \u2013 where a person hears, sees and, in some cases, feels, smells or tastes things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 where a person believes things that, when examined rationally, are obviously untrue \u2013 for example, thinking your next door neighbour is planning to kill you The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can often severely disrupt perception, thinking, emotion, and behaviour. Experiencing the symptoms of psychosis is often referred to as having a psychotic episode. What causes psychosis? Psychosis isn't a condition in itself \u2013 it's triggered by other conditions. It's sometimes possible to identify the cause of psychosis as a specific mental health condition, such as: schizophrenia \u2013 a condition that causes a range of psychological symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions bipolar disorder \u2013 a mental health condition that affects mood; a person with bipolar disorder can have episodes of depression (lows) and mania (highs) severe depression \u2013 some people with depression also have symptoms of psychosis when they're very depressed Psychosis can also be triggered by traumatic experiences, stress, or physical conditions, such as Parkinson's disease, a brain tumour, or as a result of drug misuse or alcohol misuse. How often a psychotic episode occurs and how long it lasts can depend on the underlying cause. For example, schizophrenia can be long term, but most people can make a good recovery and about a quarter only have a single psychotic episode. Episodes related to bipolar disorder usually resolve, but may recur. Read more about the causes of psychosis. Diagnosing psychosis You should see your GP immediately if you're experiencing psychotic episodes. It's important psychosis is treated as soon as possible as early treatment usually has better long-term outcomes. Your GP will look at your symptoms and rule out short-term causes, such as drug misuse. They may ask you some questions to help determine what's causing your psychosis. For example, they may ask you: whether you're taking any medication whether you've been taking illegal substances how your mood has been \u2013 for example, whether you've been depressed how you've been functioning day-to-day \u2013 for example, whether you're still working whether you have a family history of mental health conditions \u2013 such as schizophrenia about your hallucinations \u2013 such as whether you've heard voices about your delusions \u2013 such as whether you feel people are controlling you whether you have any other symptoms Your GP should refer you to a mental health specialist for further assessment and treatment. Read more about diagnosing psychosis. Treating psychosis Treatment for psychosis involves using a combination of: antipsychotic medication \u2013 which can help relieve the symptoms of psychosis psychological therapies \u2013 the one-to-one talking therapy cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) has proved successful in helping people with schizophrenia; in appropriate cases, family therapy has been shown to reduce the need for hospital treatment in people with psychosis social support \u2013 support with social needs, such as education, employment, or accommodation Most people with psychosis who get better with medication need to continue taking it for at least a year. Some people need to take medication long term to prevent symptoms recurring. If a person's psychotic episodes are severe, they may need to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital. Read more about the treatment of psychosis. Getting help for others People with psychosis often have a lack of insight. They're unaware that they're thinking and acting strangely. Because of their lack of insight, it's often down to the friends, relatives, or carers of a person affected by psychosis to seek help for them. If you're concerned about someone you know and think they may have psychosis, you could contact their social worker or community mental health nurse if they've previously been diagnosed with a mental health condition. If you think the person's symptoms are placing them at possible risk of harm, you can: take them to the nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if they agree call their GP or local out-of-hours GP call 999 and ask for an ambulance Read more about how to get help for others. Complications People with a history of psychosis are much more likely to have drug or alcohol misuse problems, or both. This may be because these substances can provide short-term symptom relief, although they usually make symptoms worse in the long term. People with psychosis also have a higher than average risk of suicide. It's estimated 1 in 5 people with psychosis will attempt to commit suicide at some point in their life, and 1 in 25 people with psychosis will kill themselves. Side effects can also occur if someone is taking antipsychotics on a long-term basis. Weight gain is a common side effect. In rare cases, a person with psychosis may also develop type 2 diabetes. Read more about the complications of psychosis. Psychosis: Sarah's story Please enable JavaScript in order to view the video. Sarah, 19, describes her experience of psychosis. Find out how early help from local services can help young people who live with mental illness. Media last reviewed: 22\/04\/2015 Next review due: 22\/04\/2017 Who's affected by psychosis? Psychosis is more common than most people realise, with schizophrenia being the most commonly associated mental health condition. Recent research found one new case of psychosis is diagnosed for every 2,000 people in England in any given year. Another study estimated around 3 in 100 people will have at least one episode of psychosis at some point in their life. Psychosis can develop at any age, but is rare in children under the age of 15. Community content from HealthUnlocked Depression Depression is more than feeling unhappy or fed up for a few days. But most people can make a full recovery with the right treatment and support Page last reviewed: 31\/07\/2014 Next review due: 30\/11\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 461 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 222  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 122  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 36  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 15  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 66  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Help and support for young people Mental health hub for young people with advice on depression, anxiety, self-harm, stress, bullying and eating disorders Do you feel you can't go on? If you are feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope, here are the people who can help Useful links NHS Choices links Bipolar disorder Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Psychotherapy Psychotic depression Schizophrenia Find mental health services near you External links Action on Postpartum Psychosis Mental Health Foundation: psychosis Mind: psychosis NICE: psychosis and schizophrenia in adults Rethink Mental Illness: psychosis Turning Point: mental health support Young Minds Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is a mental health condition that causes hallucinations, delusions, muddled thoughts, and changes in behaviour Mental health helplines Whether you're concerned about yourself or a loved one, these helplines can offer expert advice 'Samaritans saved my life' How a telephone call to the Samaritans helped save Duncan Irvine's life NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Ptosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/eyelid-problems","content":"Eyelid problems - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Eyelid problems  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Eyelid problems Introduction  Eyelid problems are common and rarely serious, but see your GP if you're worried or your eye is particularly uncomfortable. Contact your GP or NHS 111 immediately, or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if you also have pain in or around your eye or any loss of vision. The information below should give you an idea of what might be wrong, although it shouldn't be used to self-diagnose your condition. It covers possible causes for the following eyelid problems, plus specific advice about what to do. You can find out about: swollen eyelids or eyelid cysts   itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids  lumps on or around the eyelids  hooded or droopy upper eyelids  rolling outwards of the lower eyelids (ectropion)  rolling inwards of the eyelids (entropion)  yellow plaques on the eyelids  excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids  Swollen eyelid or eyelid cyst It's quite common for the upper or lower eyelid to become swollen because of a meibomian cyst (also called a chalazion). This occurs when the glands in the eyelid become blocked. These cysts vary in size, from barely visible to the size of a grape. They usually take weeks to develop. They're not usually painful, but can become red and painful if infected. The cysts can come and go by themselves, although they may take a few months to get better. You can help them heal by holding a clean flannel warmed in hot water to the closed eye for five minutes, and repeating this three to four times a day for up to four weeks. Speak to your GP if you have a cyst that doesn't clear up after a month. They can refer you to have it drained through a small incision (cut). This is a simple procedure carried out under local anaesthetic (your eye area will be numbed). It takes just a few minutes and rarely leaves a scar. Also see your GP if the cyst becomes infected because you may need to take antibiotics to prevent a deep lid infection (cellulitis). Another common cause of a swelling on the eyelid is a stye. A stye is a minor infection of the base of an eyelash that usually clears up on its own in a week or two. Holding a warm flannel to it regularly may help it heal faster. Read more about treating styes. Other causes of lid swelling include an allergic reaction and shingles on the face and eye (usually with a rash), but these are less common. Itchy, flaky or sticky eyelids Itchy and flaky eyelids are usually caused by an inflamed eyelid edge (blepharitis) or dry eye. Your eyelids may also stick together and be difficult to open, particularly when you wake up. These conditions can be irritating, but are rarely serious. You can reduce the irritation by keeping the eyelids clean and using artificial tears if your eyes are dry. Read about treating blepharitis and treating dry eyes. Contact dermatitis is another possible cause of itchy or flaky eyelids. This is a type of eczema triggered when the skin comes into contact with something you are irritated by or allergic to, such as make-up. The condition usually clears up after you stop using the substance your skin is reacting to. Sticky eyelids along with red and watering eyes can be caused by conjunctivitis, which is when an infection, allergy or irritant causes the front of the eye to become inflamed. This can get better on its own, although your GP may be able to prescribe medication to treat the underlying cause. Read more about treating conjunctivitis. Lumps on or around the eyelids Just like anywhere else on the skin, lumps can occur on or around the eyelids. Many lumps are simple cysts or styes (see above). However, occasionally a lump can be a sign of a more serious condition such as skin cancer and may need to be removed. See your GP if you're worried about a lump on or around your eyelids. Most skin cancers are basal cell carcinomas, which very rarely spread to other parts of the body. These often appear as a red or pink lump containing small blood vessels, although they can be pearly-white or \"waxy\" looking. Sometimes they may bleed. Less commonly, the lump may be a squamous cell carcinoma, which is more serious as there\u2019s a small risk it could spread to other parts of the body. These usually look like an ulcer with a red base and a scaly and crusted surface. You may also lose eyelashes where the lump is growing. In rare cases, the lump could be a sign of a very serious type of skin cancer called melanoma that can spread to other parts of the body and can be very dangerous. A lump is more likely to be melanoma if it's an irregular shape, dark or changing in colour, and getting a lot bigger over time. Hooded or droopy upper eyelids As you get older, it's quite common to have excess skin above the upper eyelids that can overhang and block your vision. This is called dermatochalasis. If it affects your vision, surgery may be considered to remove the excess skin (blepharoplasty). However, this operation isn\u2019t routinely funded on the NHS so your doctor would need to submit a funding request for this to be considered. If the edge of your upper lid droops down over your eye, it's called ptosis. This is usually age-related and develops slowly. Surgery may be needed if the edge of the lid droops so much your vision is affected. In rare cases, ptosis isn't related to age and may be caused by serious conditions such as myasthenia gravis or a brain tumour. In these cases, it's likely there would be other symptoms too. See your GP immediately if ptosis comes on rapidly, over days or weeks, or if it's associated with other symptoms, such as a headache, loss of vision or a change in the size of the pupil (the black dot at the centre of the eye). Lower eyelid that rolls outwards (ectropion)  As you get older, one or both lower eyelids can sometimes droop away from the eye and turn outwards. This is known as an ectropion. The drooping eyelid can disrupt the normal production of tears, which can cause your eye to become dry, red and irritated. Treatment may not be needed in mild cases, although drops or ointment may help make your eye more comfortable. Sometimes a minor operation is needed to correct the position of the eyelid. Read more about treating ectropion. Eyelids that roll inwards (entropion) Entropion is where the eyelid rolls inwards. It usually affects the lower lids, but it can also affect the upper lids. Like ectropion, this is often age-related. Entropion usually causes an uncomfortable watery eye because the lashes irritate the front of the eye (cornea). If this is mild, using eyedrops may be enough to protect the eye and keep you comfortable. Severe entropion can be painful and cause vision loss by damaging the cornea. Occasionally, a corneal ulcer can form and become infected. Surgery may be needed to correct entropion if it's posing a risk to the health of your eye or is causing considerable discomfort. This is carried out under local anaesthetic. If you have entropion, you should discuss your treatment options with your GP. Consult your GP immediately if your eye becomes painful and red and your vision is affected. Yellow plaques on the eyelids Flat yellow patches (plaques) over the upper or lower eyelids are called xanthelasma.  Although these plaques are harmless, they indicate you have high cholesterol. See your GP because you may be at risk of developing cardiovascular disease, such as heart attacks and strokes. Making changes to your diet and taking medication may be recommended to reduce your cholesterol level and reduce your risk of serious problems in the future, although these may not improve the plaques. If you're bothered by the appearance of the plaques, it may be possible for them to be surgically removed or treated with a laser. However, this isn't normally funded on the NHS. Excessive blinking or uncontrollable closure of the eyelids It's quite common and normal for the eyelid to flicker or twitch occasionally, particularly when you're tired. It's more unusual to have repeated spasms of excessive blinking and involuntary closure of one or both eyes. This is a type of dystonia (a movement disorder that causes muscle spasms and contractions) known as blepharospasm. Each spasm can last for a few seconds to a few minutes. The exact cause of blepharospasm is unknown. However, the blinking and closure can be triggered by bright light, stress or tiredness. Severe blepharospasm can be very disabling and embarrassing. However, an effective treatment is available. It involves having small injections of botulinum toxin (such as Botox) into the face to relax the muscles controlling the eyelids. In some cases, your GP may consider referring you to a neurologist (a specialist in conditions affecting the brain and nerves) for further investigation. Page last reviewed: 03\/06\/2015 Next review due: 03\/06\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 572 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 241  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 153  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 50  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 31  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 97  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blepharitis Conjunctivitis Dry eye syndrome Ectropion Styes Watering eyes External links Easy read information about looking after your eyelids (PDF, 101kb) The Royal College of Ophthalmologists: patient information Eye health Find out about eye tests, protecting your eyes from injury, contact lens safety and laser eye surgery NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Puberty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Livewell\/puberty\/Pages\/puberty-signs.aspx","content":"Signs of puberty: what happens to boys and girls Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Stages of puberty: what happens to boys and girls Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: View all 106 topics Popular topics Alcohol support Contraception guide Couch to 5K running plan Fitness Healthy eating Lose weight Sexual health Stop smoking Strength and Flex Stress, anxiety and depression Tiredness and fatigue Weight loss plan View all 106 topics Puberty Special reports Eat4Cheap challenge Child health Babies and toddlers Child health 6-15 Adoption and fostering Men's health Teen boys 15-18 Men's health 18-39 Men's health 40-60 Men's health 60-plus Women's health Teen girls 15-18 Women's health 18-39 Women's health 40-60 Women's health 60-plus Puberty is when a child\u2019s body begins to develop and change as they become an adult. Girls develop breasts and start their periods, and boys develop a deeper voice and start to look like men. The average age for girls to begin puberty is 11, while for boys the average age is 12. But there\u2019s no set timetable, so don\u2019t worry if your child reaches puberty before or after their friends. It\u2019s completely normal for puberty to begin at any point from the ages of 8 to 14. The process takes about four years overall. Late or early puberty Children who begin puberty either very early (before the age of 8) or very late (after 14) should see a doctor to rule out an underlying medical condition. Read more about puberty problems. This page covers: Signs of puberty in girls  Signs of puberty in boys  Mood changes during puberty  Puberty support for children  Puberty support for parents and carers  First signs of puberty in girls The first sign of puberty in girls is usually that their breasts begin to develop. It\u2019s normal for breast buds to sometimes be very tender or for one breast to start to develop several months before the other one Pubic hair also starts to grow and some girls may notice more hair on their legs and arms.   Later signs of puberty in girls After a year or so of puberty beginning, and for the next couple of years: Girls' breasts continue to grow and become fuller. Around two years after beginning puberty, girls usually have their first period. Read more about starting periods. Pubic hair becomes coarser and curlier. Underarm hair begins to grow. Some girls also have hair in other parts of their body, such as their top lip. This is completely normal. Girls start to sweat more. Girls often get acne \u2013 a skin condition that shows up as different types of spots including whiteheads, blackheads and pus-filled spots called pustules. Girls have a white vaginal discharge. Girls go through a growth spurt. From the time their periods start, girls grow 5-7.5 cm (2-3 inches) annually over the next year or two, then reach their adult height. Most girls gain weight \u2013 and it\u2019s normal for this to happen \u2013 as their body shape changes. Girls develop more body fat along their upper arms, thighs and upper back; their hips grow rounder and their waist gets narrower. After about four years of puberty in girls Breasts becomes adult-like. Pubic hair has spread to the inner thigh. Genitals should now be fully developed. Girls stop growing taller. First signs of puberty in boys The first sign of puberty in boys is usually that their testicles get bigger and the scrotum begins to thin and redden. Pubic hair also starts to appear at the base of the penis. Later signs of puberty in boys After a year or so of puberty starting, and for the next couple of years: The penis and testicles grow and the scrotum gradually becomes darker. Read more about penis health.  Pubic hair becomes thicker and curlier. Underarm hair starts to grow. Boys start to sweat more. Breasts can swell slightly temporarily \u2013 this is normal and is not the same as \"man-boobs\". Boys may have \"wet dreams\" (involuntary ejaculations of semen as they sleep).  Their voice \"breaks\" and gets permanently deeper. For a while, a boy might find his voice goes very deep one minute and very high the next. Boys often develop acne \u2013 a skin condition that shows up as different types of spots, including whiteheads, blackheads and pus-filled spots called pustules.  Boys go through a growth spurt and become taller by an average of 7-8cms, or around 3 inches a year, and more muscular.  After about four years of puberty in boys Genitals look like an adult\u2019s and pubic hair has spread to the inner thighs. Facial hair begins to grow and boys may start shaving. Boys get taller at a slower rate and stop growing completely at around 16 years of age (but may continue to get more muscular).  Most boys will have reached full adult maturity by 18 years of age.  Mood changes in puberty Puberty can be a difficult time for children. They're coping with changes in their body, and possibly acne or body odour as well, at a time when they feel self-conscious. Puberty can also be an exciting time, as children develop new emotions and feelings. But the \"emotional rollercoaster\" they\u2019re on can have psychological and emotional effects, such as: unexplained mood swings low self-esteem aggression depression  For more information on what to expect and how to handle puberty-related mood changes, read our articles on teen aggression, coping with your teenager and talking to your teen. Puberty support for children If children are worried or confused about any part of puberty, it may help them to talk to a close friend or relative. ChildLine\u2019s website answers boys' common questions about puberty and girls' common questions about puberty. It also offers free and confidential advice on its telephone helpline, which can be reached on 0800 1111. Children can also look at its puberty message board for girls and puberty message board for boys to see what other young people are asking about. 4You is a leaflet for boys and girls that explains body changes at puberty, sex and how babies are made, in a down-to-earth way. \"Periods - what you need to know\" is an FPA (formerly the Family Planning Association) leaflet that is helpful for older girls who are just about to or have just started their periods. Contact a Family\u2019s booklet \"Growing up, sex and relationships\" is for disabled children. Puberty support for parents and carers \"Surviving Adolescence \u2013 a toolkit for parents\" is a leaflet that gives parents and carers clear information on what to expect when children hit adolescence, including why they\u2019re likely to become sulky, suddenly start dieting, have crushes on friends, and crave excitement. The FPA (formerly the Family Planning Association) has a range of online leaflets that give advice on talking to your children about growing up, sex and relationships.  Page last reviewed: 26\/01\/2016 Next review due: 26\/01\/2018 More articles on: Puberty Share: Save: Subscribe:  Print: Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 102 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 62  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 14  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 9  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 16  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links The menstrual cycle explained Health info for teenage boys Health info for teenage girls Tools promotion Healthy weight calculator Calculate your child's BMI and get tailored advice How healthy is your child? Find out how you and your child are doing Starting periods Tips for parents on when to talk to girls (and boys) about periods, and what to tell them Puberty Articles about puberty, including the stages of puberty in boys and girls, tips to help parents prepare their children and common Q&As NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Early or delayed puberty","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/Conditions\/Puberty\/Pages\/Complications.aspx","content":"Early or delayed puberty - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Early or delayed puberty  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Puberty is when a child's body begins to develop and change as they become an adult. Signs of puberty include girls developing breasts and starting periods, and boys developing a larger penis and testicles, a deeper voice and a more muscular appearance. The average age for girls to start puberty is 11, while for boys the average age is 12. However, it's perfectly normal for puberty to begin at any point between the ages of 8 and 13 in girls and 9 and 14 in boys. There's not usually any need to worry if puberty doesn't start around the average age, but it's a good idea to speak to your GP for advice if it starts before 8 or hasn't started by around 14. In some cases, early puberty or delayed puberty could be a sign of an underlying condition that may need to be treated. Early puberty Early puberty, also called precocious puberty, is when: girls have signs of puberty before 8 years of age boys have signs of puberty before 9 years of age Some girls and boys may develop certain signs of puberty at a young age, but not others. For example, girls may start periods before the age of eight but have no breast development. See your GP if this happens to your child. Causes of early puberty It's not always clear what causes early puberty. It may just be a tendency that runs in your family. Occasionally it can be caused by: a problem in the brain, such as a tumour damage to the brain as a result of an infection, surgery or radiotherapy a problem with the ovaries or thyroid gland a genetic disorder, such as McCune-Albright syndrome Early puberty mostly affects girls and often has no obvious cause. It's less common in boys and may be more likely to be associated with an underlying problem. Tests and treatments for early puberty Your GP may refer you to a specialist if they think there could be an underlying cause that needs to be investigated. Tests that may be carried out include a blood test to check hormone levels, a hand X-ray to help determine likely adult height, and an ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to check for problems such as tumours. Early puberty can be treated by: treating any underlying cause using medication to reduce hormone levels and pause sexual development for a few years Treatment with medication is usually only recommended if it's thought early puberty will cause emotional or physical problems, such as a very short stature or early periods in girls, which may cause significant distress. Delayed puberty Delayed puberty is when: boys have no signs of testicular development by 14 years of age girls have not started to develop breasts by 13 years of age, or they have developed breasts but their periods haven't started by 15 Causes of delayed puberty It's not always clear what causes delayed puberty. It may just be a tendency that runs in your family, and is generally more common in boys. Occasionally it can be caused by: a long-term illness, such as cystic fibrosis, diabetes or kidney disease malnutrition, possibly from an eating disorder or a condition such as cystic fibrosis or coeliac disease a problem with the ovaries, testes, thyroid gland, or a gland in the brain called the pituitary gland a disorder of sexual development, such as androgen insensitivity syndrome a genetic condition, such as Kallman syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome Tests and treatments for delayed puberty Your GP may refer you to a specialist if they think there could be an underlying cause that needs to be investigated. Tests that may be carried out include a blood test to check hormone levels, a hand X-ray to help determine likely adult height, and an ultrasound scan or MRI scan to check for problems with glands or organs. Delayed puberty can be treated by: treating any underlying cause using medication for a few months to increase hormone levels and trigger the start of puberty  Treatment with medication is usually recommended if the lack of development is causing problems, such as significant distress. Page last reviewed: 20\/04\/2016 Next review due: 20\/04\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 100 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 32  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 13  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 37  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Periods Stages of puberty Teen boys' health Teen girls' health External links ChildLine: puberty for boys ChildLine: puberty for girls Girls and puberty Q&A What happens to girls' bodies during puberty. Includes growing hair, breasts, periods, and moods Boys and puberty Q&A What to expect as you grow up, including erections, feelings, wet dreams, spots and more NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pubic lice","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pubic-lice","content":"Pubic lice - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pubic lice  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Pubic lice Introduction  Pubic lice (Phthirus pubis) are tiny parasitic insects that live on coarse human body hair, such as pubic hair. As well as being found in pubic hair, the lice are also sometimes found in: underarm and leg hair hair on the chest, abdomen and back facial hair, such as beards and moustaches eyelashes and eyebrows (very occasionally) Unlike head lice, pubic lice don't live in scalp hair. Pubic lice are spread through close bodily contact, most commonly sexual contact. Symptoms of pubic lice After getting pubic lice, it can take several weeks before any symptoms appear. Symptoms are the same for men and women and include: itching in the affected areas inflammation and irritation caused by scratching black powder in your underwear blue spots or small spots of blood on your skin, such as on your thighs or lower abdomen (caused by lice bites) Itching is the most common symptom of pubic lice and is an allergic reaction to their saliva. The itching is usually worse at night, when the lice are most active. What do pubic lice look like? Adult pubic lice are very small (2mm long) and aren't easy to see. They're a yellow-grey or dusky red colour and have six legs. Pubic lice are sometimes known as crabs because they have two large front legs that look like the claws of a crab. These are used to hold onto the base of hairs. The lice lay their eggs (nits) in sacs that are stuck firmly to hairs and are a pale brownish colour. When the eggs hatch, the empty egg sacs are white. Although pubic lice and lice eggs are small and difficult to see, they may be visible in coarse hair anywhere on your body (apart from hair on your head). When to seek medical advice See your GP or practice nurse if you think you have pubic lice. Alternatively, you could go to a sexual health clinic, also known as a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic. These are often located in hospitals or health centres. Search for sexual health services in your area. Pubic lice are usually easy to diagnose by examining the affected area. The doctor or nurse may use a magnifying glass to look for signs of the lice, such as pale-coloured eggs or the lice themselves. Getting tested for STIs You should be tested for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) if you have pubic lice through sexual contact. The lice don't transmit HIV or other STIs, but a check-up is usually recommended as a precaution.  Any sexual partners you've had over the last three months will also need to be seen and treated. If you prefer, staff at the clinic can contact a person on your behalf without releasing your details. How do you get pubic lice? Pubic lice aren't related to poor personal hygiene. They're usually spread through close bodily contact with an infected person. The lice crawl from hair to hair, but can't fly or jump. They need human blood to survive, so will only leave the body to move from one person to another. The most common way pubic lice are spread is through sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Using condoms and other methods of barrier contraception doesn't protect you against pubic lice. Other types of close bodily contact, such as hugging and kissing, can also spread the lice. It's also possible \u2013 though much rarer \u2013 for pubic lice to be spread through sharing clothes, towels and bedding.  Treating pubic lice Pubic lice can be treated at home with insecticide cream, lotion or shampoo. Your GP or pharmacist can advise you about which treatment to use and how to use it. It's important to follow this advice. Some treatments only need to be applied to the affected area, but sometimes the whole body must be treated, taking care to avoid the eyes. The treatment usually needs to be repeated after three to seven days. If the treatment doesn't work, you may need to use another type. This is because pubic lice can develop resistance to some treatments. Your GP or pharmacist will be able to advise you about suitable alternatives. To prevent re-infestation, anyone you've had close bodily contact with, including any sexual partners you've had in the past three months, should also be treated, even if they don't have symptoms. Certain groups, such as young people under 18 years of age and pregnant or breastfeeding women, may require a specific type of treatment. Ask your GP or pharmacist for further advice about this. Applying a lotion, cream or shampoo In most cases the instructions for using a lotion, cream or shampoo will be as follows: apply the product to the affected area, particularly any hairy areas, such as your eyebrows, beard or moustache \u2013 depending on the product, you might need to apply it to your whole body, including the scalp, neck, ears and face be careful not to get the product in your eyes \u2013 if you do, rinse your eyes thoroughly with water reapply the treatment if you wash any part of your body during the treatment time after the treatment time (stated on the packet) has passed, wash the lotion or cream off repeat the treatment after three to seven days as instructed Don't use the medication more than twice. If you think it hasn't worked go to see your GP or pharmacist for advice. Side effects Insecticides used to treat pubic lice may cause skin irritation, such as itchiness, redness, stinging or burning. If you have skin irritation, wash the insecticide off the affected area. Some aqueous and alcohol-based medications may discolour permed, coloured or bleached hair. Check the patient information leaflet. Follow-up treatment The first treatment application will probably kill the lice, but the eggs may not have been destroyed. This means more lice could hatch and the cycle will start again. Reapplying the treatment after three or seven days will ensure that any lice are killed before they're old enough to lay more eggs. Check for lice a week after your second treatment, or return to your GP, practice nurse, or sexual health clinic so they can check for you. Finding empty eggshells (dead nits) doesn't necessarily mean you're still infested as they can remain stuck to the hairs even after treatment. Treating an eyelash infestation Eyelash infestations are rare. If your eyelashes are infested, seek specialist advice from your doctor. They'll be able to recommend the correct treatment for you.  You can't use the same insecticide lotion or cream that's used on your body because it will irritate your eyes. Make sure you follow the treatment instructions carefully. Washing clothing, towels and bedding Wash clothing, towels and bedding in a washing machine. This should be on a hot cycle (50C or higher) to ensure the lice are killed and to prevent reinfection. Complications of pubic lice Sometimes, a pubic lice infestation can lead to minor complications, such as skin or eye problems. Scratching can irritate your skin, or it could lead to an infection such as impetigo (a bacterial skin infection) or furunculosis (boils on the skin). Eye infections, such as conjunctivitis, and eye inflammation, such as blepharitis, can sometimes develop if your eyelashes have been infested with pubic lice. Seek medical advice if you have severe skin irritation or sore eyes. Sexual health advice You can call the Department of Health's sexual health helpline on 0300 123 7123 for confidential advice and support 24 hours a day, seven days a week. If you're under 25, you can also contact an advisor at Brook using their text and webchat service. They provide free and confidential information and advice about STIs, contraception, pregnancy, plus other sexual health matters. Page last reviewed: 15\/01\/2016 Next review due: 15\/01\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 171 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 105  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 21  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Head lice Sexual health self-assessment STIs External links BASHH: public and patient information Brook: our services FPA: help and advice Sexual health Articles and videos on contraception, STIs and talking about sex. Includes a section for teens What happens at an STI clinic What to expect at an STI clinic, including tests, treatment, and the questions you may be asked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pudendal neuralgia","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pudendal-neuralgia","content":"Pudendal neuralgia - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pudendal neuralgia  Share: Save: Print: Print this page   Pudendal neuralgia is a type of long-term (chronic) pelvic pain that originates from damage or irritation of the pudendal nerve. The pudendal nerve is one of the main nerves in the pelvis, supplying areas such as the: lower buttocks area between the buttocks and genitals (perineum) area around the back passage (rectum) vulva, labia, and clitoris in women scrotum and penis in men Pudendal neuralgia can be very uncomfortable and distressing, but help is available and there are several treatments that can be tried. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Tests and diagnosis Treatments Causes Symptoms of pudendal neuralgia The main symptom of pudendal neuralgia is pelvic pain. Any of the areas supplied by the pudendal nerve can be affected. The pain may: feel like a burning, crushing, shooting or prickling sensation develop gradually or suddenly be constant \u2013 but worse at some times and better at others be worse when sitting down and improve when standing or lying down Other symptoms can include: numbness and pins and needles in the pelvic area increased sensitivity to pain \u2013 you may find just a light touch or wearing clothes uncomfortable feeling as though there's swelling or an object in your perineum \u2013 often described as feeling like a golf or tennis ball needing to go the toilet frequently or suddenly pain during sex, difficulty reaching orgasm, and erectile dysfunction in men When to get medical advice See your GP if you have persistent pelvic pain. Don't delay seeking advice if the pain is causing problems. Pudendal neuralgia can continue to get worse if left untreated, and early treatment may be more effective. The stress of living with the condition can also have a significant impact on your physical and mental health if it's not treated. Tests for pudendal neuralgia Your GP will ask about your symptoms and may carry out an examination of the area to check for any obvious causes of your pain. If they think you could have pudendal neuralgia, or they're not sure what's causing your pain, they may refer you to a specialist for further tests. These tests may include: a vaginal or rectal exam \u2013 to see if the pain occurs when your doctor applies pressure to the pudendal nerve with their finger a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan \u2013 to check for problems such as entrapment (compression) of the pudendal nerve and rule out other possible causes of your pain nerve studies \u2013 a small device inserted into your rectum is used to stimulate nearby nerves with mild electrical impulses to check how well the nerves are working nerve block injections \u2013 painkilling medication is injected around the pudendal nerve to see if your pain improves Treatments for pudendal neuralgia Treatments for pudendal neuralgia include: avoiding things that make the pain worse, such as cycling, constipation or prolonged sitting \u2013 it may help to use a special ring-shaped cushion when sitting and try constipation treatments medications to alter the pain \u2013 these will normally be special medications for nerve pain, rather than ordinary painkillers like paracetamol physiotherapy \u2013 a physiotherapist can teach you exercises to relax your pelvic floor muscles (muscles used to control urination) and other muscles that can irritate the pudendal nerve painkilling injections \u2013 injections of local anaesthetic and steroid medication may relieve the pain for a few months at a time decompression surgery \u2013 if something is pressing on the pudendal nerve, such as a piece of tissue, surgery to reposition it away from the nerve may help improve your pain nerve stimulation \u2013 a special device is surgically implanted under the skin to deliver mild electrical impulses to the nerve and interrupt pain signals sent to the brain You may be referred to a specialist NHS pain management team or pain management programme for support and advice about treatment. Causes of pudendal neuralgia Pudendal neuralgia can occur if the pudendal nerve is damaged, irritated or squashed (compressed). Possible causes include: compression of the pudendal nerve by nearby muscles or tissue \u2013 sometimes called pudendal nerve entrapment or Alcock canal syndrome prolonged sitting, cycling, horse riding or constipation (usually for months or years) \u2013 this can cause repeated minor damage to the pelvic area previous surgery to the pelvic area a break in one of the bones in the pelvis damage to the pudendal nerve during childbirth \u2013 this may improve after a few months a non-cancerous or cancerous growth (tumour) pressing on the pudendal nerve In some cases, a specific cause isn't identified. Page last reviewed: 08\/06\/2016 Next review due: 08\/06\/2018 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 4 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 2  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 1  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Living with pain Pelvic pain External links Health Organization for Pudendal Education (HOPE) How to get NHS help for long-term pain Find out how to get help from your GP or local hospital if you have persistent pain Ways to manage persistent pain If you're in pain, keeping active will help, as well as taking painkillers and doing physiotherapy NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Puerperal psychosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/postpartum-psychosis","content":"Postpartum (after childbirth) psychosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Postpartum psychosis   Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview postpartum-psychosis Community Postpartum psychosis (psychosis after childbirth) Introduction  Postpartum psychosis is a severe mental illness that can affect a woman after she has a baby. It causes her to have hallucinations and delusional thinking (symptoms of psychosis). Postpartum psychosis is thought to affect around one in every 1,000 women who give birth. It's sometimes referred to as puerperal psychosis or postnatal psychosis. Read on to find out: What are the symptoms? How serious can it be? Who is at risk? What should I do if I think someone has developed postpartum psychosis? What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? How is it treated? What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? Can it be prevented? What's the outlook? What support is available? What are the symptoms of postpartum psychosis? Most women with postpartum psychosis will experience psychosis (a 'psychotic episode') and other symptoms very soon after giving birth, usually within the first two weeks. Some women develop symptoms later than this \u2013 sometimes at the time they stop breastfeeding, or when their periods restart. Psychosis Psychosis causes people to perceive or interpret things differently from those around them. The two main symptoms are: hallucinations \u2013 usually hearing or seeing things that aren't there; a common hallucination is hearing voices delusions \u2013 thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true (for example believing you've won the lottery) The combination of hallucinations and delusional thinking can severely disrupt her perception, thinking, emotions and behaviour. Other symptoms A woman with postpartum psychosis may also behave in a way that is out of character, and may experience: a high mood (mania) \u2013 she may talk and think too much or too quickly, feel 'on top of the world', or be more sociable than normal a loss of inhibitions paranoia, feeling suspicious or fearful restlessness or agitation a low mood \u2013 she may show signs of depression and be withdrawn or tearful, with a lack of energy, loss of appetite, anxiety, irritability or trouble sleeping severe confusion Her mood may change rapidly. Some affected women experience symptoms of mania and depression at the same time. How serious can it be? Postpartum psychosis is a serious mental illness that should be treated as a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, the postpartum psychosis can get worse rapidly.  The illness could cause her to neglect or harm her baby or harm herself. She may not realise she is ill, and it may be up to her partner, family or friends to spot the warning signs and take action \u2013 see What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis?'. The majority of women with postpartum psychosis make a full recovery, and often very quickly provided they receive the right treatment. Who is at risk of postpartum psychosis? Postpartum psychosis is more likely to affect women who: have had postpartum psychosis before already have a serious mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia have a relative who has experienced psychosis (even if the woman herself has no mental illness) Once a woman develops postpartum psychosis, there's a high chance she will have another episode following future pregnancies. What should I do if I think someone may have developed postpartum psychosis? Contact your GP immediately if you think someone you know may have developed postnatal psychosis. If this isn't possible, call NHS 111 or your local out-of-hours service. If you think there's a danger of imminent harm, call 999 and ask for an ambulance. What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? If you already have a care plan because you've been assessed to be at high risk, there should be an emergency number you can call to reach a crisis team. If you don't have a care plan, and think you're having a psychotic episode, see your GP urgently or go to A&E. How is postpartum psychosis treated? Postpartum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency. The woman may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment. Ideally, she would be admitted with her baby to a specialist psychiatric unit called a mother and baby unit. For some women, this allows them to continue bonding with their baby and gives them confidence in their role as mother. Medication Typically, a woman with postpartum psychosis would be prescribed one or more of the following drugs: An antidepressant, which works by balancing mood-altering chemicals in the brain. It can help ease symptoms such as low mood, irritability, lack of concentration and sleeplessness, allowing the mother to function normally and cope better with her new baby. An antipsychotic (neuroleptic), which works by blocking the effect of dopamine (a chemical that transmits messages in the brain). A mood stabilising drug. If lithium is prescribed, regular blood tests are needed at least every three months to make sure lithium levels are not too high or low. Doctors will weigh up the effectiveness of these medications with the risk of side effects and the risk of any harmful effects on pregnancy or breastfeeding. What's the cause of postpartum psychosis? We're not really sure what causes postpartum psychosis. Fluctuations in hormones and sleep patterns could play a role, and there does seem to be a genetic basis, as a woman is more likely to develop the illness if her close relative had it. There seems to be link between postpartum psychosis and bipolar disorder. It's important to understand that postpartum psychosis is not caused by anything the woman did, nor is it caused by stress, relationship problems or a baby being unwanted. Can postpartum psychosis be prevented? A woman's risk of developing postpartum psychosis should be assessed during her antenatal appointments so that if she were to develop the illness after giving birth, the signs would be spotted straight away and there would be a treatment plan to follow. There are no specific screening tools for postpartum psychosis, but the antenatal care team should be able to identify women who are more likely to develop it and refer them to a psychiatrist for an assessment. If you're at high risk... If you've been assessed to be at high risk of developing postpartum psychosis, you may be offered a pre-birth planning meeting at around 32 weeks of pregnancy. Everyone involved in your care would be invited to this meeting \u2013 your partner, family or friends, a mental health professional, midwife, obstetrician, health visitor and GP.  The aim is to make everyone aware of your risk and to agree on a plan for your care. Studies suggest that taking certain medicines in late pregnancy could help to prevent postpartum psychosis in high-risk women. You may want to discuss this option with your care team. The risks and benefits of medication taken in pregnancy should always be carefully weighed up. You may also be given advice on what you can do to stay as well as possible during pregnancy \u2013 for example, reducing any stress in your life, and getting as much sleep as possible. You'll get a copy of your written care plan, which should include how you and your family can get help quickly if you were to become ill \u2013 see What should I do if I think I'm having an episode? In the first few weeks after your baby is born, you should be regularly visited by a midwife, health visitor and mental health nurse. What's the outlook for someone with postpartum psychosis? With treatment, the vast majority of women with postpartum psychosis start to feel better very quickly.  Some mothers have difficulty bonding with their baby after an episode of postpartum psychosis, but this doesn't usually last long. With support from family, friends and the mental health team, most women go on to have very good relationship with their child. About half of women who have postpartum psychosis will go on to have another episode in the future \u2013 not necessarily after having another child. In these cases, they should be able to get help quickly. With appropriate treatment, this risk can be reduced. An episode of postpartum psychosis is sometimes followed by period of depression, anxiety and low confidence. It might take a while to come to terms with what happened.  Further advice and support Women who have experienced or are experiencing postpartum psychosis may find the following charities and forums helpful: Action Postpartum Psychosis The Association for Post Natal Illness PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Postpartum psychosis can be stressful and distressing for partners, too. It can be isolating and lonely if both their baby and partner is in hospital. If you are struggling to cope because your partner is going through an episode of postpartum psychosis or recovering from this, don't be afraid to get help yourself. Talk to a mental health professional involved in your partner's care, or approach one of the above charities. Helping your partner recover from postpartum psychosis You can help your partner by: being calm and supportive taking time to listen to her helping with housework and cooking helping with child care and night time feeds letting her get as much sleep as possible letting others help with shopping and household chores so you have more family time together not having too many friends visiting keeping the home environment as calm and quiet as possible  Page last reviewed: 19\/09\/2014 Next review due: 19\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 40 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 0  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Psychosis Mental health problems and pregnancy The Mental Health Act Postnatal depression External links National Childbirth Trust PANDAS (Pre and Postnatal Depression Advice and Support) Action Postpartum Psychosis Association for Post Natal Illness Community content from HealthUnlocked Long-term conditions and pregnancy Find out the health issues that can affect pregnancy and antenatal care NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Puffy ankles","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/oedema","content":"Oedema - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Oedema  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Oedema Clinical trials Oedema   Oedema is a build up of fluid in the body which causes the affected tissue to become swollen. The swelling can occur in one particular part of the body or may be more general, depending on the cause. Fluid can accumulate under the skin \u2013 most commonly causing swelling of the lower legs and ankles \u2013 or in one of the body's internal organs, such as the lungs. As well as swelling or puffiness of the skin, oedema can also cause: skin discolouration areas of skin that temporarily hold the imprint of your finger when pressed (known as pitting oedema) aching, tender limbs stiff joints weight gain Types of oedema Oedema is most common in the feet and ankles. This is known as peripheral oedema. Other types of oedema include: cerebral oedema \u2013 affecting the brain pulmonary oedema \u2013 affecting the lungs macular oedema \u2013 affecting the eyes Idiopathic oedema is a term used to describe cases of oedema where a cause can't be found. Causes of oedema It's normal to have some swelling in your legs at the end of the day, particularly if you've been sitting or standing for long periods. Oedema is often a symptom of an underlying health condition. It can occur as a result of the following conditions or treatments: pregnancy kidney disease  heart failure  chronic lung disease  thyroid disease liver disease   malnutrition medication, such as corticosteroids or medicine for high blood pressure (hypertension) the contraceptive pill Immobility and standing for long periods are the two most common causes of oedema in the legs. Other possible causes include: a blood clot severe varicose veins a leg injury or leg surgery burns to the skin Treating oedema Oedema is often temporary and clears up by itself. For example, if you've been standing up for too long on a hot day, your ankles may swell up until you get the chance to put your feet up and rest. If oedema doesn't go away by itself, see your GP. They'll try and find out if there's an underlying cause which needs to be treated. This could involve taking medication or following some advice, such as: losing weight (if you're overweight) taking regular exercise, such as walking, swimming or cycling raising your legs three to four times a day to improve your circulation avoiding standing for long periods of time If an underlying condition is causing the fluid imbalance, it should clear up after the condition has been diagnosed and treated. Lymphoedema Lymphoedema is swelling in the legs caused by a blockage in the lymphatic system, or an inherited condition. The lymphatic system consists of a series of lymph nodes (glands) connected by a network of vessels (lymphatics), similar to blood vessels. Fluid surrounding body tissues usually drains into nearby lymph vessels so it can be transported back into the blood. However, if the lymph vessels are blocked, the fluid can't be reabsorbed and will build up in the tissue. Unlike oedema, lymphoedema is a long-term condition that can cause discomfort, pain and a loss of mobility. It can't be cured, but it can be controlled using a number of treatments, including: compression stockings skin care lymphatic massage elevation Read more about lymphoedema. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 25\/07\/2016 Next review due: 25\/07\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 1594 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 639  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 505  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 140  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 234  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Heart failure High blood pressure Kidney disease Lymphoedema Overweight and pregnant External links Lymphoedema Support Network Swollen ankles in pregnancy The causes of swollen ankles, feet and fingers in pregnancy, and when you need to see a doctor Is your blood pressure too high? At least 25% of adults have high blood pressure. Get tips on how to keep healthy Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pulmonary embolism","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pulmonary-embolism","content":"Pulmonary embolism - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pulmonary embolism  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pulmonary-embolism Clinical trials pulmonary-embolism Community Pulmonary embolism pulmonary-embolism Symptoms pulmonary-embolism Causes pulmonary-embolism Diagnosis pulmonary-embolism Treatment pulmonary-embolism Prevention Introduction  A pulmonary embolism is a blockage in the pulmonary artery, the blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the lungs. This blockage \u2013 usually a blood clot \u2013 is potentially life-threatening because it can prevent blood from reaching your lungs. The symptoms of a pulmonary embolism can sometimes be difficult to recognise because they can vary between individuals. However, the main symptoms include: chest pain \u2013 a sharp, stabbing pain that may be worse when you breathe in shortness of breath \u2013 which can come on suddenly or develop gradually coughing \u2013 this is usually dry, but may include coughing up blood or mucus that contains blood feeling faint, dizzy or passing out You should visit your GP as soon as possible if you have a combination of these symptoms. If your symptoms are particularly severe, dial 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance. Read more about diagnosing a pulmonary embolism. What causes a pulmonary embolism? A pulmonary embolism is often caused by a blood clot travelling up from one of the deep veins in your legs to your heart and lungs. A blood clot in one of the deep veins of the legs is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). DVT can occur for no apparent reason, but it often develops after long periods of inactivity, such as during a long-haul flight or if you're ill in hospital. DVT can also occur during pregnancy or as a result of some medical conditions, such as cancer or heart failure, or if the wall of a blood vessel becomes damaged. Read more about the causes of a pulmonary embolism. Diagnosing a pulmonary embolism Diagnosing a pulmonary embolism can be difficult because the symptoms are common to many other conditions. However, an accurate diagnosis is important because treating a pulmonary embolism isn't always easy and the treatment used can cause side effects. A number of tests can help determine whether you have a pulmonary embolism or rule out other causes of your symptoms. For example, you may have a chest X-ray or tests to check how well your lungs are working. Read more about how a pulmonary embolism is diagnosed. How a pulmonary embolism is treated Pulmonary embolisms are treated with anticoagulant medicines. These stop the blood clot getting bigger while your body slowly reabsorbs it, and reduce your risk of further clots developing. If you're diagnosed with a pulmonary embolism, you'll usually be given regular anticoagulant injections for about five days to begin with. You'll also be prescribed an anticoagulant tablet called warfarin to take for several months. As part of your treatment, you'll need regular blood tests to check that the dose of warfarin you're receiving is correct. If the dose is too high you may experience bleeding and if it's too low you may have further blood clots. Keeping mobile will also help you maintain good blood circulation and prevent further blood clots forming. Read more about treating a pulmonary embolism. Preventing a pulmonary embolism A number of methods may be recommended to prevent a pulmonary embolism if you're at risk of developing blood clots. These include: taking anticoagulant tablets, such as warfarin wearing compression stockings or using compression devices avoiding long periods of inactivity leading a healthy lifestyle, such as giving up smoking (if you smoke) and eating a healthy, balanced diet low in fat and including plenty of fruit and vegetables Read more about preventing a pulmonary embolism. Page last reviewed: 13\/07\/2015 Next review due: 13\/07\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 373 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 192  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 102  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 26  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 12  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 41  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Anticoagulant medicines Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Warfarin External links British Lung Foundation: support and information CKS: pulmonary embolism 'I got DVT from flying' Mark Pownall developed deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on a long-haul flight from New Orleans to London Preventing DVT when you travel Reduce your risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) during a long journey, including advice on leg exercises and flight socks Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pulmonary fibrosis (idiopathic)","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pulmonary-fibrosis","content":"Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pulmonary-fibrosis Clinical trials pulmonary-fibrosis Community Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis pulmonary-fibrosis Diagnosis pulmonary-fibrosis Treatment   Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a condition in which the lungs become scarred and breathing becomes increasingly difficult. It's not clear what causes it, but it usually affects people around 70-75 years of age and is rare in people under 50. Several treatments can help reduce the rate at which IPF gets worse, but there's currently no treatment that can stop or reverse the scarring of the lungs. This page covers: Symptoms When to get medical advice Causes Treatments Outlook Symptoms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis The symptoms of IPF tend to develop gradually and get slowly worse over time. Symptoms can include: shortness of breath a persistent dry cough tiredness loss of appetite and weight loss rounded and swollen fingertips (clubbed fingers) Many people ignore their breathlessness at first and blame it on getting old or being out of shape. But eventually even light activity such as getting dressed can cause shortness of breath. When to get medical advice See your GP if you've struggled with your breathing for a while or have had a cough for more than three weeks. These symptoms aren't normal and shouldn't be ignored. If your GP thinks you could have a lung condition such as IPF, they can refer you to a hospital specialist for tests such as: breathing (lung function) tests blood tests a chest X-ray and computerised tomography (CT) scan a lung biopsy (where a small piece of lung tissue is removed during keyhole surgery so it can be analysed) Read more about the tests for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Causes of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis In people with IPF, the tiny air sacs in the lungs (alveoli) become damaged and increasingly scarred. This causes the lungs to become stiff and means it's difficult for oxygen to get into the blood. The reason this happens isn't clear. \"Idiopathic\" means the cause is unknown. IPF has been linked to: exposure to certain types of dust, such as metal or wood dust viral infections a family history of IPF \u2013 around 1 in 20 people with IPF has another family member with the condition gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)  smoking But it's not known whether some of these factors directly cause IPF. Treatments for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis There's currently no cure for IPF, but there are several treatments that can help relieve the symptoms and slow down its progression. Treatments include: self-care measures \u2013 such as stopping smoking, eating healthily and exercising regularly medication to reduce the rate at which scarring worsens \u2013 such as pirfenidone and nintedanib breathing oxygen through a mask \u2013 you can do this while you're at home and\/or while you're out and about pulmonary rehabilitation \u2013 exercises and advice to help you breathe more easily a lung transplant \u2013 this is suitable in a few cases, although donor lungs are rare Read more about how idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is treated. Outlook for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis IPF gets worse over time, although the speed at which this happens is highly variable. Some people respond well to treatment and remain relatively free of symptoms for many years, while others may get rapidly worse or find the breathlessness debilitating. Other problems can also sometimes develop, including chest infections, pulmonary hypertension and heart failure. It's very difficult to predict how long someone with IPF will survive at the time of diagnosis. Regular monitoring over time can indicate whether it's getting worse quickly or slowly. Before the availability of specific treatments like pirfenidone and nintedanib about half of people with IPF lived at least three years from their diagnosis. Around 1 in 5 survived for more than five years. It's hoped these figures will be improved by the availability of new treatments to slow the disease's progression. Information about you If you have IPF, your clinical team will pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 24\/06\/2016 Next review due: 24\/06\/2019 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 411 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 191  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 135  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 28  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 11  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 46  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Shortness of breath Lung transplant Stop smoking External links British Lung Foundation: idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Action for Pulmonary Fibrosis Pulmonary Fibrosis Trust Men's health 60-plus Healthy lifestyle information for men aged 60 and over Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pulmonary hypertension","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pulmonary-hypertension","content":"Pulmonary hypertension - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pulmonary hypertension  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pulmonary-hypertension Clinical trials pulmonary-hypertension Community Pulmonary hypertension pulmonary-hypertension Symptoms pulmonary-hypertension Causes pulmonary-hypertension Diagnosis pulmonary-hypertension Treatment Introduction  Pulmonary hypertension is raised blood pressure within the pulmonary arteries, which are the blood vessels that supply the lungs. It's a serious medical condition that can damage the right side of the heart, making the heart less efficient at pumping blood around the body and getting oxygen to the muscles. Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension include: shortness of breath fatigue (tiredness)  feeling faint or dizzy chest pain (angina) a racing heartbeat (palpitations) leg and ankle swelling  Read more about the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension. What happens in pulmonary hypertension In a healthy person, blood travels through the pulmonary arteries from the right-hand side of the heart, picking up oxygen when it reaches the lungs. Oxygen-rich blood from the lungs returns to the left-hand side of the heart and is pumped around the body to the muscles, where oxygen is needed. During exercise, the demand for oxygen increases, so the heart beats quicker and the pulmonary arteries usually widen to let more blood flow through to the lungs. However, if you have pulmonary hypertension, the walls of your pulmonary arteries are thick and stiff, making it difficult for them to expand to allow more blood through. Alternatively, your pulmonary arteries may be blocked by blood clots, which can also hinder blood flow. The reduced blood flow makes it difficult for the right-hand side of your heart to pump blood through the arteries, which means this part of the heart has to work harder. If the right-hand side of your heart has to continually work harder, it may gradually become weaker. This makes it less efficient at pumping blood and can lead to heart failure. Read more about the causes of pulmonary hypertension. Who is affected In the UK, around 6,000-7,000 people have pulmonary hypertension. It's also thought that more remain undiagnosed. Pulmonary hypertension can affect people of any age, although some types are more common in young women. When to see your GP Correctly diagnosing pulmonary hypertension can sometimes take time, because its symptoms are similar to many other heart and lung conditions. However, pulmonary hypertension is a serious condition, so it is important to visit your GP if you experience symptoms. They will ask about your symptoms and medical history, and may perform a physical examination. Tests, including an echocardiogram (a type of ultrasound scan) and an electrocardiogram (which tests the electrical rhythm of your heart) can be used to see how well your heart and pulmonary arteries are working. Read more about how pulmonary hypertension is diagnosed. Treating pulmonary hypertension Pulmonary hypertension is a serious condition that usually gets progressively worse. Left untreated, it may cause heart failure, which can be fatal. If pulmonary hypertension is caused by an existing condition, the underlying condition should be treated first. In some cases, this can prevent the pulmonary arteries being permanently damaged. If you have a type of pulmonary hypertension known as pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), you will be referred to a centre that specialises in treating the condition. There are currently seven specialist centres in England and one in Scotland. They are: Great Ormond Street Hospital (for children), London Hammersmith Hospital, London Royal Brompton Hospital, London Royal Free Hospital, London Papworth Hospital NHS Trust, Cambridgeshire Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Golden Jubilee National Hospital, Glasgow A number of medications can be used to treat pulmonary hypertension. Anticoagulant medicines and diuretics may be recommended first. Later on, a number of more specialist medications may be prescribed. Some people with PAH may be prescribed home oxygen therapy. Read more about treating pulmonary hypertension. Outlook Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension, such as breathlessness, can significantly affect your quality of life, as you may be unable to continue with your regular activities. It is important that treatment is started as soon as possible, to improve your symptoms. The outlook varies between individuals depending on factors such as how quickly the condition is diagnosed, how advanced your symptoms are and whether you have another underlying health condition. The specialist in charge of your care will be able to provide more detailed information. However, the outlook for pulmonary hypertension has improved with the introduction of new medicines over the last 20 years and people are now able to live longer. Information about you If you have pulmonary hypertension, your clinical team may pass information about you on to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS). This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time. Find out more about the register. Page last reviewed: 23\/02\/2015 Next review due: 23\/02\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 135 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 79  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 34  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Blood clot Congenital heart disease Heart failure Heart health Pulmonary embolism Shortness of breath External links BHF: how your heart works British Lung Foundation Pulmonary Hypertension Association UK Healthy hearts Heart disease is the most common cause of death in the UK. Find out what to do to keep your heart fit for purpose Heart palpitations Does your heart occasionally flutter or start pounding? Read about the common causes Community content from HealthUnlocked NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pyelonephritis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/kidney-infection","content":"Kidney infection - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Kidney infection  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Kidney-infection Clinical trials Kidney infection Kidney-infection Symptoms Kidney-infection Causes Kidney-infection Diagnosis Kidney-infection Treatment Kidney-infection Complications Kidney-infection Prevention Introduction  A kidney infection (pyelonephritis) is a painful and unpleasant illness caused by bacteria travelling from your bladder into one or both of your kidneys. It's more serious than cystitis, a common infection of the bladder that makes urinating painful. If treated promptly, a kidney infection doesn't cause serious harm, but will make you feel very unwell. If a kidney infection isn't treated, it can get worse and cause permanent kidney damage. Symptoms of a kidney infection often come on within a few hours. You can feel feverish, shivery, sick and have a pain in your back or side. Read more about the symptoms of a kidney infection. When to see your GP See your GP if you have a fever and persistent tummy, lower back or genital pain, or if you notice a change to your usual pattern of urination. Most kidney infections need prompt treatment with antibiotics to stop the infection from damaging the kidneys or spreading to the bloodstream. You may also need painkillers. If you're especially vulnerable to the effects of an infection \u2013 for example, if you have a pre-existing health condition or are pregnant, you may be admitted to hospital and treated with antibiotics through an intravenous drip. After taking antibiotics, you should feel completely better after about two weeks. In rare cases, a kidney infection can cause further problems. These include blood poisoning (sepsis) and a build-up of pus in the kidney called an abscess. Read more about treating a kidney infection and the complications of a kidney infection. What causes a kidney infection? A kidney infection usually happens when bacteria \u2013 often a type called E. coli \u2013 gets into the urethra (the tube which carries urine out of the body) and travels up through the bladder and into the kidneys. Read more about the causes of a kidney infection. Who's at risk? Kidney infections are relatively rare. It's estimated that one in every 830 people develops a kidney infection each year in the UK. They can happen at any age, but are much more common in women. In fact, women are six times more likely to get a kidney infection than men. This is because a woman's urethra is shorter, making it easier for bacteria to reach the kidneys. Younger women are most at risk because they tend to be more sexually active, and having frequent sex increases the chances of getting a kidney infection. Younger children are also vulnerable to developing kidney infections because they may be born with an abnormality of the urinary tract or have a condition called vesico-ureteric reflux, where there is a backflow of urine from the bladder up to the kidneys. Can kidney infections be prevented? You can reduce your chances of developing a kidney infection by keeping your bladder and urethra free from bacteria. This can include drinking plenty of fluids, keeping your genitals clean and treating any constipation. Read more about preventing a kidney infection. Page last reviewed: 19\/12\/2014 Next review due: 19\/12\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 913 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 451  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 226  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 76  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 52  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 108  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Cystitis Kidney health Kidney stones Urinary infections in adults Urinary infections in children External links NICE: urinary tract infection in children Are your kidneys healthy? Take this short assessment to find out if you need to have your kidney function checked Keeping your kidneys healthy Five simple lifestyle tips to keep your kidneys healthy and functioning well Kidney health Find out about how to look after your kidneys and whether you need to have them checked Find and choose services for Kidney infection Find and compare services Located in Looking for other services? View services A-Z NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pyloric stenosis","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/indigestion\/pages\/complications.aspx","content":"Indigestion - Complications - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Indigestion - Complications  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview Indigestion Clinical trials Indigestion Indigestion Symptoms Indigestion Causes Indigestion Diagnosis Indigestion Treatment Indigestion Complications Complications of indigestion  In most cases, indigestion (dyspepsia) is mild and only occurs occasionally. However, severe indigestion can cause complications, some of which are outlined below. Oesophageal stricture Indigestion is often caused by acid reflux, which occurs when stomach acid leaks back up into your gullet (oesophagus) and irritates its lining. If this irritation builds up over time, it can cause your oesophagus to become scarred. The scarring can eventually lead to your oesophagus becoming narrow and constricted (known as oesophageal stricture). If you have oesophageal stricture, you may have symptoms such as: difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) food that becomes lodged in your throat chest pain Oesophageal stricture is often treated using surgery to widen your oesophagus. Pyloric stenosis Like oesophageal stricture, pyloric stenosis is caused by long-term irritation of the lining of your digestive system from stomach acid. Pyloric stenosis occurs when the passage between your stomach and your small intestine (known as the pylorus) becomes scarred and narrowed. This causes vomiting and prevents any food you eat from being properly digested. In most cases, pyloric stenosis is treated using surgery to return the pylorus to its proper width. Barrett\u2019s oesophagus Repeated episodes of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) can lead to changes in the cells lining your lower oesophagus. This is a condition known as Barrett\u2019s oesophagus. It is estimated that 1 in 10 people with GORD will develop Barrett\u2019s oesophagus. Most cases of Barrett\u2019s oesophagus first develop in people aged 50-70 years old. The average age at diagnosis is 62. Barrett\u2019s oesophagus does not usually cause noticeable symptoms other than those associated with GORD. The concern is that Barrett\u2019s oesophagus is a pre-cancerous condition. This means that while changes in the cells are not cancerous, there is a small risk they could develop into \"full blown\" cancer in the future. This would then trigger the onset of oesophageal cancer. Page last reviewed: 03\/09\/2014 Next review due: 03\/09\/2016 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 90 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 43  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 25  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 7  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 5  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 10  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Antacids Endoscopy Heartburn and GORD NSAIDs Stomach ulcer External links NICE: dyspepsia and GORD in adults Digestive health Find out how to beat common digestive problems like bloating and indigestion NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"},{"name":"Pyoderma gangrenosum","url":"http:\/\/www.nhs.uk\/conditions\/pyoderma-gangrenosum","content":"Pyoderma gangrenosum - NHS Choices Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility Home About Contact Tools Video e-Referral Service Communities IPS Translate Log in or create an account Your health, your choices Information navigation Search entire site Enter a search term: Main navigation Health A-Z Hundreds of conditions explained Arthritis information Asthma information Back pain information Stress, anxiety, depression information Breast cancer information Pregnancy and baby information Diabetes information Dementia information Heart disease information Measles information NHS Health Check information Vaccinations information Common health questions All A-Z topics Live Well Over 100 topics on healthy living Alcohol articles Couch to 5K articles Teeth and dentistry articles Fitness articles The flu jab articles Healthy eating articles Lose weight articles Mental health articles Pain articles Sexual health articles Sleep articles Stop smoking articles Tiredness articles Health check tools All Live Well topics Care and support Your essential guide to social care About social care Choosing care services Social care assessments NHS continuing care Mental capacity Home care Care homes Breaks from caring Carers\u2019 rights Young carers All care and support topics Health news Health news stories unspun Diet and nutrition news reports Obesity and weight loss news reports Neurology and dementia news reports Lifestyle and environment news reports Pregnancy and children news reports Cancer news reports Drugs and vaccines news reports Heart and lungs news reports Medical practice news reports Older people and ageing news reports Genetics and stem cells news reports Mental health news reports Diabetes news reports Topical questions and answers Special reports All Behind the Headlines news Services near you Services explained See what the NHS offers Choose the right service A&E search Hospitals search GPs search Dentistssearch Pharmacies search Homecare and care homes search Maternity search Depression search Alcohol search Sexual health search Consultants search Stop smoking services Urgent care services All directories Pyoderma gangrenosum  Share: Save: Print: Print this page Overview pyoderma-gangrenosum Clinical trials Pyoderma gangrenosum Introduction  Pyoderma gangrenosum is a rare skin condition that causes painful ulcers. It's usually treatable, but may take some time to heal and may leave some scarring.  It usually suddenly starts as a small pimple, red bump or blood blister. The skin then breaks down into a painful ulcer with a purple or blue edge, which may ooze fluid. The ulcer can rapidly get bigger and deeper, and several may develop in the area. If the ulcer gets infected, you may also feel unwell and develop a high temperature (fever). Pyoderma gangrenosum usually affects the legs, although it can affect any area of skin, including around the head and neck, arms and genitals. Occasionally, it develops around the site of an injury or surgical wound (see what causes pyoderma gangrenosum? below).  Despite the similar-sounding name, pyoderma gangrenosum is not related to gangrene. When to seek medical advice You should seek medical advice as soon as possible if you think you may have developed pyoderma gangrenosum. Either see your GP or contact your care team if you have one of the conditions mentioned below. Pyoderma gangrenosum is a serious condition that can progress quickly, so it's important for it to be diagnosed and treated promptly. Early treatment can also help reduce the risk of scarring. Who is affected Pyoderma gangrenosum is seen in men and women of any age, but usually affects young and middle-aged adults. People with the following health conditions are particularly susceptible: inflammatory bowel disease \u2013 including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease rheumatoid arthritis \u2013 a long-term condition causing pain, swelling and stiffness in the joints blood dyscrasia \u2013 a blood disorder hepatitis \u2013 inflammation of the liver granulomatosis with polyangiitis \u2013 an uncommon condition in which the walls of blood vessels become inflamed cancer affecting the blood cells \u2013 including acute myeloid leukaemia PAPA syndrome \u2013 a rare genetic disorder The severity of these conditions is often not related to your chances of developing pyoderma gangrenosum. It can sometimes develop even if the condition is mild or well controlled. What causes pyoderma gangrenosum?  The exact cause of pyoderma gangrenosum is not understood, but it's thought to be a reaction to a disease or illness, such as the health conditions listed above. However, about half of all people with pyoderma gangrenosum have none of these conditions, and there is no obvious reason for it. There is usually a high concentration of neutrophils (white blood cells involved in inflammation) in the affected tissue, which suggests it may be related to overactivity of the immune system.  The reaction may sometimes be triggered by minor skin damage or an injury \u2013 for example, it may develop around the site of a stoma or surgical wound, a needle prick, a biopsy or an insect bite.  The skin reaction is not hereditary, so it's not passed from parents to their children. It's also not contagious, so can't be transferred from or to another person. Diagnosing pyoderma gangrenosum There is no specific blood test for pyoderma gangrenosum. If your doctor thinks you might have the condition, they may take a sample of your skin (a biopsy) to examine under the microscope in a laboratory. This can help rule out other causes of skin ulcers. Your doctor may also take a swab of the wound to check for any infection, and may order blood tests to check for conditions that are associated with pyoderma gangrenosum. How pyoderma gangrenosum is treated Pyoderma gangrenosum is treatable, but may take some time to heal. There\u2019s no clear evidence to suggest what the best treatment is, but the main treatments are outlined below. Care of the wound Dressings may need to be applied regularly to soak up any discharge and help retain the creams applied to the wound. Any severely damaged tissue should be gently removed by a doctor or nurse. Creams, ointments or injections Strong steroid creams or ointments are applied on and around ulcers daily or on alternate days. They often help the ulcers heal quickly, particularly if they are small and diagnosed early. Alternatively, the steroid medication triamcinolone may be injected into the edge of the ulcer. In more severe cases, steroid medication may be injected into a vein (intravenously). Tacrolimus ointment has also proved useful in treating pyoderma gangrenosum ulcers. Steroid tablets Most people with pyoderma gangrenosum will need to take steroid tablets such as prednisolone, either on their own or with antibiotics such as dapsone or minocycline. These reduce inflammation and help the ulcers to heal. However, the long-term use of steroids is associated with serious side effects such as bone thinning (osteoporosis), so they need to be used with caution. Read more about the side effects of steroid medication. Immunosuppressants Pyoderma gangrenosum is thought to be caused by an overactive immune system, and immunosuppressants (medication that suppresses the immune system) have proved useful in reducing pain and helping the ulcers to heal. A few examples are ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, and newer treatments such as infliximab, which are used for more severe cases of the condition. However, immunosuppressants can have unpleasant side effects and will need to be given and monitored by a specialist. They're not currently licensed for the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum. Outlook In many people with pyoderma gangrenosum, the ulcers heal with relatively simple treatments. However, some scarring in the affected area is common. The progression of the condition varies from person to person \u2013 it may suddenly clear up within a few weeks, stay the same for months or years, or slowly heal over many months. Some people have flare-ups after the slightest injury or for no apparent reason, and in some cases the condition recurs after treatment. Community content from HealthUnlocked Page last reviewed: 30\/03\/2015 Next review due: 30\/03\/2017 Share: Save: Print: Print this page Ratings How helpful is this page? Average rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Based on 67 ratings All ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 38  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 17  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 3  ratings Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful 6  ratings Add your rating Unhelpful Not very helpful Fairly helpful Helpful Very helpful Useful links NHS Choices links Leg ulcer Steroid creams Steroid tablets External links BAD: pyoderma gangrenosum (PDF, 233kb) Keep skin healthy Keep skin healthy in all weathers. Plus common skin conditions and treatments, including acne NHS Choices information Choices e-newsletters Your pages Site policies Terms and conditions Editorial policy Comments policy Syndication Privacy policy Cookies policy Links policy Accessibility Sitemap Other NHS sites Summary Care Records NHS Scotland NHS Northern Ireland NHS Wales NHS Jobs Health Careers Department of Health NHS England About the NHS The NHS in England About NHS services NHS Friends and Family Test Quality accounts NHS e-Referral Service Find authorities and trusts Healthwatch England The NHS complaints procedure Other channels Follow us on Twitter Facebook YouTube Video library Links library Other Languages Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages. Contact NHS Choices Choices helpdesk Freedom of Information requests Working for NHS Choices Request content evidence sources NHS Direct legacy enquiries Press enquiries Get Your Health newsletters Sign up for Your Health, the monthly e-newsletter packed with the latest news and topical tips from NHS Choices Get Your Health newsletters Sign up Emails from NHS Choices NHS Choices offers a range of e-newsletters on various topics. Sign up now to get information, tips and advice straight to your inbox Sign up for Dementia Information Service emails Sign up for pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for weight loss support emails Create an NHS Choices account With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in. Create account Already have an account? Log in Saved pages Keep track of important pages Recently visited pages Easily find again pages you have been reading Pages you might like Have pages recommended to you \u2013 \u2013"}]}